# Configure Windows

Operating System (OS)
- UI for hardware and environment to run applications.
- It has Kernel files and device drivers to interact with hardware and programs to provide UI and configuration tools

# Windows User settings

## Windows 10 Desktop

- Provides interface (shell) for configurations of software and hardware
- Top level UI => Desktop: START menu interface, Instant Search Box, Task View button, Notification area

## Windows 11 Desktop
- Center aligned touchbar and more space
- Multiple Desktops for different use cases

## Windows settings and control panel
- Settings app and control panel => Two interfaces for Windows administration
- Windows configuration data stored on database called `Registry`
- Windows Settings contains graphical applets to modify configurations
### Settings
Graphical icons hold pages for different configuration optiona. Windows 11's settings are reached on the navigation Menu

### Control Panel
- Legacy Control Panel has some extra configuration options not available on the newer Settings
- Every applet (icon) in Configration Panel represents a configuration task. It can belong to the OS or to applications.

## Account Settings
- User Account => Authenticated access to the computer with rights and priviledges. 
- Accounts can get permissions on files, folders, and printers
- Each account hasa Profile => Default folders for personal data
- First user is the Administrator Account, Standard users only have access to their profile.

### Account Settings (interface)
- Local-only account can access only one computer
- Microsoft account can access multiple computers and Microsoft's cloud services.
- Your Info, email & accounts, sign-in options, access work or school, Family and other users, Sync settings.

### User Accounts Control Panel Applet (legacy)
- Provides options to adjust account name and changing account privileges
- It can change the User Account Control (UAC) settings => to prevent unauthorized use of admin privileges.

## Privacy Settings
Determines:
- What Data Windows is able to collect for telemetry
- App permissions to access devices, location, contacts, calendar, emails and files.

## Desktop Settings
- Local setting and appereance

### Time and Language
- Timezone to keep PC syncronized
- Region for keyboard, locatization, speech recognition. Multiple languages can be enabled.

### Personalization settings
- Custom themes: Wallpaper, screen saver, font, properties of Start Menu.

## Ease of access settings (Accessibility)
Input and Output configurations to fit each user's needs

- Vision: Cursor, sceen contrast, magnifier, narrator tool (optional)
- Hearing: Volume, mono mixing, closed-captioning, visual notifications
- Interaction: Keyboard and mouse usability. Speech and eye control features.

## File explorer
- File explorer / Explorer app allows to search, copy, move, delete, create files

### System Objects
- Mediate access to data files (On left navigation panel). 
- Representation of logical storage areas.
- Example: User Account, OneDrive, This PC, Network (computers, shared folders, shared printers), Recycle Bin

### Drives and Folders
- Data files are written to Disk drives
- Drives are referred by letters: A, B, C, D
- They can be physical disk or partition, network folder or removable disk.
- Each drive has a `root directory`, represented by a `\`, for example: `C:\`

### System Files
- System files are files required by OS to function
- Root directory contains following Folders to separate System and User files:
    - `Windows` => System root with drivers, logs, fonts, and system configuration files(System32)
    - `Program Files\Program Files (x86)`=> Subdirectory for installed application software
    - `Users`=> Users profile settings and data. Contains `NTUSER.DAT` registry data, and subfolder with personal files, data, and hidden folders for application settings and cusstomizations.

## File explorer and Indexing options
### File Explorer General tab
- You can set how to view the folders, and how to access them (single or double click)

### View Tab
- Hide extensions => File extensions usually hidden to avoid changing them, as applications need to know if they can open them.
- Hidden files and folders => Files can be tagged as hidden. Can be revealed by "Show hidden files and folders"
- Hide protected OS files => Hidden by default. `File/Resource protection` prevents users and admins from deleting this files.

### Indexing options
On Search Tab or File Explorer Options dialog, or Inexing Options applet.
- Define indexed locations and rebuild the index.
- It can include folders and email data stores
- * Corrupted index is common cause of search problems

# Configure Windows System Settings

## System Settings
System settin page on Setting app => Configure Input/Output devices, power, remote desktop, notifications, clipboard.
About page => Hardware and OS information

### Advanced Settings
- Performance options => 
     - Desktop visuale effects, virtual memory (paging), operation mode. 
     - Favor performance of background or foreground processes
     - * Desktop PC should always be optimized for forground processes
- Startup and recovery options, env variables (paths), user profiles

In legacy systems System Applet would manage advanced settings.

## Update and Security Settings

- Patch management => Updates to improve reliability, security, or performance
- Security Apps => Apps to detect and block threats to computer system and data (Ex. Crowdstrike)

### Windows Update
- Configure update detection and install via Settings > Update & Security
- Windows Update can be paused temporarily, not completely disabled.
- Windows Event Viewer records update activity

### Windows Security
Page with shortcuts to management pages of built-in  Windows Defender and virus/threat protection and firewall.

### Activation
- Anti-piracy technology
- System must be activated after a certain number of days with a license

## Device Settings

