# Managing Windows

Settings and Control Panel for configuration of single computer. Command line is necessary for more advanced and multiple PC configuration in enterprise environments.

## MMC (Microsoft Management Consoles)
- Standard interface for advanced configuration Windows desktops and servers (schedule tasks, security, disk subsystem)
- Registry Editor when a configuration not present on GUI tools

## Device Manager (devmgmt.msc)
Page to view and edit properties of hardware (change config, update drivers, remove)

### Updating and trubleshooting devices
- Windows might recognize device and function but not find drivers for it => "Unknown Device" or "Generic type" listed with yellow exclamation mark.
- If device never has worked: Check driver is compatible with OS => Download on manufacturers website or via Windows Update.
- In device manager, right click on device > Properties. Click on Update Driver.

### Removing, Uninstalling and Disabling devices
- Plug-n-Play devices can be removed without uninstalling
- Close apps that use a drive you are removing => Safely Remove Hardware icon in notification area => Stop or Eject device
- Optionally, right click and Uninstall Device (driver) before unplugging it
- Optionally Disable device, to not allow users to reach it if drivers not available or for security => Useful for devices that can't be easily removed

## Disk Management Console (diskmgmt.msc)
- Displays summary of fixed and removable disks. HDD and SSDs can be divided into logical partitions.

### Terminology
Partition: Configured on SSDs or HDDs, at least 1.
Volume: Logical unit available to the OS. It could be 1:1 mapping Partition-Volume, but a volume can be supported by multiple devices and partitions,like in RAID.
Drive: Volume that has been mapped to a letter

Disk 0 => Typically holds OS, and has 3 volumes:
    - System Volume: OS files, usually named `C:`
    - Boot volume: Files used to boot the OS with EFI (Extensible Firmware Interface) system. No letter usually
    - Recovery partition: Tools to repair damaged installation or reset to factory state. WinRE (Windows Recovery Environment). No letters.

### Supported tasks
1. Initializing Disk: For initializing unformatted HDD/SSDs. MBR or GPT partition styles as options.
2. Partitioning: Each disk needs at least one partition.
3. Formatting: New partitions need to have a file system, usually NTFS for Windows. FAT32 for smaller drives
    - 512-byte sector smallest unit of storage on fixed disks. File System can cluster sectors. Smaller sectors have better use of space, but larger sectors are more performant for larger file sizes.
    - You cannot delete system or boot partions. During setup, Boot partion must be NTFS and system patition in FAT32
4. Repartitioning: Existing partitions can be expanded, removed or shrunk.
5. Configuring Dynamic Disks: If more than one disk a dynamic disk can be configured to implement RAID redundancy => Now Storage Spaces.    

## Disk Maintenance tools
Disk drives and file systems require the most attention to keep PC performant

### Main problems of Disks
1. Fragmentation: When file is not saves on contiguous sectorof an HDD
2. Capacity. File creation > deletion. > 20% free space in boot volume and performance will be impared.
3. Damage: More commong in HDD, but also degradation in SSDs

### Tools to fix
1. Defragmentation (dfgui.exe)
- On HDD => rewrites files to keep them on contiguous clusters, reducing look up time
- On SSD => Data is stored on bloks not controlled by OS.
    - Defragmentation tool instructs the drive to run a TRIM process: Controller tags files marked by the OS as deletable and makes the writable.
    - It can perform a sort of defragmentation if Volume Shadow Copy service enabled

Windows automatically schedules disk optimization in the Task Scheduler.

2. Disk Clean-up (cleanmgr.exe)
- It tracks files that can be safely deleted to reclaim disk space (In Recycling bin)
- Can be run in admin mode to Clean Up System Files => Cleares cache from Windows Udpater and Windows Defender

## Task Scheduler (taskschd.msc)
Runs commands and scripts automatically

 - Trigger can be an event instead of a calendar date and time.
 - Tasks can include multiple actions
 - All activity logged
 - Tasks can be organized in folders
 - You must define the path to the task and the credetials the task will run under. Task won't run if user account doesn't have the proper permissions.

 ## Local Users and Groups Console (lusrmgr.msc)
 - Advanced UI to create, delete, disable, and modifying user accounts.
 - Security groups can be used to give common  permissions to users.

 ## Certificate Manager console (certmng.msc)
 - Digital certificate proves identity of subject, user, computer, service.
 - Validity of each certificate guaranteed by Certificate Authority (CA)
 - Certificate Manager console shows which certificates have been installed and mechanism to import and install new certificates.
 
### Main Subfolders of Certificate Manager
1. Personal => Certificates issues to the user's account for network auth, encryption, and digital signatures
2. Trusted Root Certificate Authority => Superset of certificates of all trusted issuers. Managed by Windows.
3. Third Party => Certificates from trusted issuers outside Microsoft and local enterprise.

- There's also computer certificate store (certlm.msc)
- Trusting an unsafe CA is a critical security vulnerability => A rougue certificate can allowa website to masquarade as a legitimate one.

## Group Policy Editor (gpedit.msc)
- Complex user and system registry configuration via policies
- Groups are more efficient way of managing policy settings with hundreds of users instead of manually configuring each machine.
- Policies enabled with toggle on a group level
- Commonly associated with Active Directory and used through Group Policy Management Console (gpmc.msc)

On local directory
- Local Security Policy Editor => Edits security policies specifically

## Registry Editor (regedit.exe)
The Registry is a remote accesible DB for OS, device, and software configuration storage

### Registry keys
In Registry Keys are equivalent to the Folders in the file system. Registry contains 5 keys with computer and user databases.
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE (HKLM) DB for system-wide settings
HKEY_USERS settings of individual user's profiles
HKEY_CURRENT_USER (HKCU): Subset of HKEY_USERS with settings for logged user

- Most work on Registry editor done on HKLM or HKCU
- Registry DB stored in binary files called `hives`: 1 file (no ext), .LOG file, .SAV (copy of the key at end of setup), .ALT backup file.

### Editing the Registry
- Each key can contain subkeys or `value entries`, analogous to folders
- Value keys are key pairs with three parts: name, data type, value.
- You can Export registry file to copy into another computer

## Custom Microsoft Management Console (mmc command)
- MMC is a utility container to add/remove snaps-in. Snap-in examples: Disk Management, Device Manager, Group Policy Editor.
- `mmc` command allows for customization and export of personal selection of snaps-in
- You can export the custom MMC as a msc file and have it for quick access on the Desktop

# Use Performance and Troubleshooting tools
Use of system audit and log tools to diagnose problems.
- Start with `Task Manager`: Hard drive usage, RAM usage, processes (apps and resource)
- Hard drives are usually a problem, sometimes processes of Windows processes throttle.
- Check Bios => Secure Boot can have a performance consequence.
- Windows Disk clean => Get rid of files
- Regedit => Remove password when users forgets it. Turn off safe-mode.

## System Information (msinfo32.exe)
- Comprehensive report of system's hardware and software components.
- Inventory of system resources, drivers, env variables, network status.

## Event Viewer (eventvwr.msc)
- When windows detects a problem it generates an error code that can be researched on the Microsoft Knowledge Base
- Event Viewer is snap-in to view and manage logs. 
- Default page a summary of recent errors and warnings.
- Left panel has logs by categories. Right panel tools for opening, filtering, and create tasks from envents

### Default Log Files
`Windows Log` folder has 4 main log files:
1. System Log -> Events that affect the core OS (loading, hardware, driver, network failures)
2. Application Log -> Non-core processes and some third-party apps
3. Security Log -> Audit data from System
4. Setup Log -> Records events generated during installation

- Default log file size is 20MB (changeable in Log Properties)
- Log files can become very large

`Application and Services Logs` => Useful for investigatin thrid-party software issues

### Event Source and Severity
Each event has a source application, an ID and a severity level:
1. Critical: Process that has stopped responding
2. Error: Non-critical errors.
3. Warning: State that can lead to an error
4. Information: Process information that is useful, but not a problem
5. Audit Success / Failure: Security log failed or success classification

## Task Manager Process Monitoring (taskmgr.exe)
- Monitor Windows resources (Ctrl+Shift+ESC or Start Menu)
- Starts in Summary mode, select show details to expand 
- Processes tab: Expand each process sub-processes and resources it uses
- Details tab => More details on a process and identify services associated with it
- Set Priority => Gives resource priority to certain tasks (For example give a VoIP process more resources for better communication)

## Task Manager Performance Monitoring (Performance Tab)

Performance tab => More Info on CPU, RAM, GPU, Network
App History => Usage information for Windows store apps

### CPU and GPU monitoring (In Performance Tab)
- Shows number of cores and logical processors (HyperThreading)
- Shows if virtualization enabled
- Shows number of processes, threads
If sustained periods of high utilization => Consider adding more resources to the system

### Memory monitoring (In Performance Tab)
In Use => Refers to RAM usage
Commited => Total memory requested + paged memory available
Cached => Fetching frequently used files beforehand for speed
Paged Pool and non-paged pool => OS kernel and driver usage memory

### Disk Monitoring
- Reports capacity and statistics for active time, response time and read/write speeds.
- It's an avarage, so if multiple Disks it's not necessarily representative
- High disk utilization and low response times => Poor performance (HDD performance, exessive paging, faulty file/cache, bad drivers, bad sectors)

### Network monitoring
- Reports send and receive throughput for active network adapter
- Shows IP and MAC addresses
- If wireless, SSID, connection type, and signal strength

### Users tab
Information about specific Users resource utilization

### Startup Processes
Which programs and scripts run on Startup and their impact on boot time

### Services console
- Monitors state of background processes or Services (no window)
- Services provide functionality to parts of Windows OS (logon, browsing the network, index files, optimize search)
- They can be installed by Windows or by other applications (anti-virus, database, backupsoftware)
- `Open Services` button => Services Console (services.msc)
    - Allows for disable non-essential services or for manual startup (instead of auto)
    - Restarting services can be a good troubleshooting step

## Resource Monitor and Performance Monitor
More detailed performance monitoring tool than Task Manager

### Resource Monitor (resmon.exe)
- Enhanced version of snapshot monitoring of Task Manager: Graphs, key statistics 
- Statistics on threads started or hard/page faults/seconds => Rising numbers of these indicate problems

### Performance Monitor (perfmon.msc)
- Real time charts of a system that can be logged for long-term analysis.
- Monitor different resources at different times of the day => Identify bottlenecks
- Helps identify which components of the computer might need upgrade (Disk, Network card)

Two types of Logs
1. Counter => Log statistics about resources like Disk, RAM, processor to assess health of the system
2. Trace => Statistics about services. An extension of Event Viewer with detailed reports about their behaviors

- Saved log files can be loaded into Performance Monitor from the Reports folder

## Performance Counter (Review!)
- To configure Counter log we need to select what to monitor in report
- In Performance Monitor => Resources like Memory and disk are collected into Objects
- Objects have counters that represent different performance statistics

Common used Objects and associated Counters
- Processor Object
    % Processor Time -> Percentage of time processor executing non-idle thread. Shouldn't be sustained greater than 85%
    % Privileged Time -> System processes that are software apps. If sustained high use more CPU is needed (can barely run Windows processes)
- Physical Disk
    % Disk Time -> % of time disk writes and reads data. Shoudn't be > 85%
    Average Disk Queue Length -> Number of requests outstanding.
- Memory
    Available bytes -> RAM available shouldn't be < 10%. Less could mean memory leak (allocation without release)
    Pages/sec -> Number of pages read or written to disk to solve "hard page" faults.
- Paging File Object
    % Usage -> percent of pagefile usage. If too high, you need more RAM. Excessive paging can lead to worst disk performance.


* Hard page fault: When a process attempt to access a Page (unit of memory) but can't find it in RAM or Cache. It needs to retreive it from a Page file, which is much slower, specially with a HDD.

## System Configuration Utility (msconfig.exe)
- Settings that modify the way a computer boots and loads Windows
- msconfig tool to test configurations for diagnostic purposes => Then permanent changes can be made with Services

- General Tab
Configure startup mode: Normal (all drivers and services), Diagnostic (load basic devices and services), and Selective startup.
- Boot Tab
Configure basic settins in Boot Configuration Data (BCD) store => Change default OS, bootoptions, minimal drivers and services.
- Services Tab
Choose specific services to run at startup

# Command Line

## Command Prompt
- Commands can be run from Run dialog, but to rin a series of commands and see their output you need command shell.
- cmd.exe is legacy command shell (black) and Windows Power Shell is newer version (blue)

### Administrative command prompt
- Elevation => Admin privileges for a command (Right click and select `Run as Administrator`)
- Default foler for Administrator `C:\Windows\System32`, and for user `C:\Users\Username`

### Command Syntax
> Command + \Switches

`>cls` => clear shell
- Some commands work on interactive mode, meaning that you enter command space of the program. Type `quit` or `exit` to leave the program command line.

## GEtting help
`help` => List of available commands
`help Command` => Lists the syntax and switches for the command. Also `/?` switch will will display command's help

#### Copy command
`copy <src file> <dest folder>` => Copy file
`copy c:\Folder\*.* <dest folder` => Copy any filename and any file type to destination folder. Only files, no folders.

`xcopy <src dir> <dest folder> /E` => Copy files and folders. `/E` switch tells to copy folders and directories inside too.
`robocopy <src dir> <dest folder> /E` => Same as xcopy

## Navigation Commands
- String before `>` shows working directory. Commands operate on working dir unless specified witl absolute or relative path.
- Windows uses backslashes `\` but also will understand forward slashes `/` like Linux.

### Listing Files and Directories
`dir` => Equivalent to linux `ls`
`/o` switch:
    `/o:n` -> List by name
    `/o:s` -> List by size
    `/o:e` -> List by extension
    `/o:d` -> List by date

### Change current directory
`cd` command => Change current directory
`cd ..` Move backwards
`cd <new directory path>`
`cd \` => Root directory

### Changing current Drive
Put drive name with Colon, ex `D:`

## File management commands
`move` and `copy` command have same structure: `<command> <src_dir> <dest_dir>`
`xcopy` => Command to copy file and subdirectories: `xcopy <src_dir> <dest_dir> Switches`
`robocopy` => More modern xcopy, recommended by Microsoft. Better handling of long file names and NFTS attributes. Also robocopy can move files with `/mov` switch
`md <directory_name>` => Make directory
`rmdir <directory_name>` => Remove directory. `/s` to remove sub directories and files if not empty

## Disk Management commands
- Disk Management snap-in has limited functionality

### diskpart command
`diskpart` => Runs interactive utility and waits for prompt
    `select disk 0` => Select disk 0, or another
        `detail disk` ==> display configuration info of the disk
            `select partition 0` or `select volume 0`
                `detail partition` or `detail volume`
                    `assign` => Change drive letter
                    `delete` => destroy volume
                    `extend` => extend the size

### format command
`format` command writes new file system to a drive, deletes existing data.
Ex. `format E:/fs:NTFS` => format drive E with NTFS file system

- Remove references to existing files but the sectors are not scrubbed or zeroed. Data might be recoverable by third-party tools as long as they are not overitten.

### chkdsk 
Scans file system and sectors for faults and attempts repairs if any problems.
`chkdsk X:` => Runs tool in read-only mode on drive X
`chkdsk X: /f` => Attempts to fix encountered system errors
`chkdsk X: /r` => Fixes file system errors and attempts to recover bad sectors. Prompted to save recoverable data, copied to the root directory as `filennn.chk` files
- Check disk cannot fix open files. => Takes a long time and cancelling check not recommended. Run read-only scan first.

## System Management Commands
`shutdown /s` => Close all programs and services and shut down computer
`shutdown /h` => Hybernate. Save session to disk before shuting down computer.
`shutdown /l` => Log off. Close user processes and log off, leave computer running.
`shutdown /r` => Close all programs and services before restarting.

### System Fie checker
`sfc` => Manual interface to verify and restore (from cache) system files if corrupt or damaged.
`sfc /scannow` => Runs scan immediately
`sfc /scanonce` => Schedules scan when computer is restarted
`sfc /scanboot` => Schedules scan every time PC boots

### Reporting the Windows version
`winver` => Reports version info. Three parts of code:
 - Windows brand: 10 or 11
 - Windows version: Code representng time of release, for example: 1607 July of 2016, 21H1 First half of 2021
 - OS build: Two part numeric value. First part brand plus feature update, Second part quality update status (patches) 

 - Use rev number to look up changes and know issues on Microsoft Knowledge Base.








