# Managing Windows Networks

## Windows Network Connection Types
- PC connects to networ trhough Network Adapter (or NIC) to switch or wireless AP

### Wired Connections
- Most based on Ethernet with RJ45 or Fiber Optic cabling.
- Adapter and switch must have same settings -> Usually set to autonegotiate link
- In Windows adapters get a name assigned: Ethernet, Ethernet2...
- To adapt settings manually: `Device Maager -> Properties -> Advanced (tab)` or `Network & Internet`

### Wireless connection
- Network status icon on notification area -> Select from list and enter required credentials
- Connect Automatically option possible
- If SSID suppresed /hidden, WLAN settings must be set manually: `Network & Internet -> Wi-Fi -> Manage known networks -> Add a new Network`
- Wifi properties of adapter on `Device Manager`. Most card support any standard available (802.11n, 802.11g, 802.b)

## IP addressing schemes
- To connect to network, logical adapter must have valid client network configuration: Adapter configured with client software and appropiate IP address allocated

### Internet Protocol addressing scheme
Ipv4. 32-bit address with 32-bit subnet mask.
Ipv6: 128-bit address. Interface address is last 64-bits. Network prefixes identify logical networks on first 64 bits.

- default gateway: IP address of the local router. Usually assigned first value available.
- Host also configured with DNS servers. DNS usually condifured on the Router in a home setting (Same values in host and router)
-  A Host can have a domain suffix to identify FQDN on the local network.

### Static vs Dynamic COnfiguration
IPs can be assigned statically or dinamically. Most hosts are configured to get IP address automatically with a DHCP server.

## Windows Client Configuration
Ip config of each network adapter on GUI via `Network & Internet` settings or `Network Connections` applet (ncpa.cpl). Default installed protocols on NEtwork Adapter:
- Client for Microsoft Networks
- File and Print sharing for Microsoft Networks
- Internet Protocol: Both IPv4 and IPv6 will be installed, adapter uses appropiate one depending on network it connects to
- Link-Layer Topology Discovery: Mapping and discovery for networks without dedicated name servers

- Default to DHCP for obtaining IP addresses
- Ip Configurations can be set via Settings App too, `Edit IP settings`

## Network Location

- Network connections governed by local OS Firewall settings by Windows Defender firewall.
- NLA - Network Location Awareness service prompts to set network type when connecting to one

Private network type:
- Trusted network (Home or office)
- PC is discoverable for print or file sharing

Public network:
- Firewall will block all traffic
- PC will be hidden from other devices
- Can't be used for file and print sharing

`Network & Internet` => Modify network type
- If Network discovery enabled: other PCs can be accessed via Network Object in File Explorer.
- UNC (Universal Naming Convention) standard to address network and host resources. Network path syntax: `\\ Host\Path` . Host is IP or FQDN and Path is shared folder's file path.

## Windows Defender Firewall Configuration

`Firewall & network protection` in Windows Defender Firewall applet.
- Block or allow incoming connections
- Configure exceptions in status page => Allow specific programs to go through Firewall

## VPN and WWAN Connection types

### VPN
- Enterprises need workers and services to connect remotely to their local networks
- VPN is an encrypted tunnel between two private networks, over a public network (WLAN)
- Remote PC becomes part of the local network, only limited to WAN link bandwidth
- `Network & Internet` to configure VPN. Some might require use of third-party software

### WWAN
Wireless Wide Area Network connection: Use cellular adapter to connect to internet via provider's network
- Bandwidth depends on adapter's and local cell tower supported techology (3G, 4G, 5G)
- WWAN adapter can be a USB or internal (Needs a SIM for GSM adapters) -> Enable connection on network status icon
- Cellular networks can charge for exceeding => Set network as `metered` and set data limit in Settings

## Proxy Settings
- Forwards packages from another service
- Can improve performance through caching
- Can improve security
- `Network & Internet` Settings to configure proxy settings

# Troubleshoot Windows Networking

## Troubleshoot IP configuration

Error states local network adater (Given not disconnected):
- Limited connectivity: DHCP server can't be contacted => Device gets APIPA or use IP specified as an alternative in IPv4 properties
- No Internet Access: IP config valid for LAN and Windows can't identify working Internet connection => Problem with router, DNS or both 

- We can See internet configuration with `ipconfig` or in `Network & Internet` settings

### ipconfig command
- `ipconfig` => IP address, subnet mask and default gateway for all network adapters
    `/all` => Detailed configuration. DHCP and DNS servers, MAC address, NetBIOS status.

It helps answer these questions:
- Does the adapter have a static address? 
    Are parameters correct (IP, subnet mask, DNS server) given the local network's IP range?
- Is adapter configured by DHCP
    Is there a valid lease?
    Are parameters correct for local network (if there is a DHCP lease)?

If DHCP lease missing or incorrect:
`ipconfig /release` => Release IP address for the adapter
`ipconfig /renew` => Force a renewal of DHCP lease
`ipconfig /displaydns` => Host and domain names recently queried. Good for troubleshooting
`ipconfig /flushdns` => Clear DNS resolver cache. If cached records are out-of-date, there will be problems accessing host and services.

### hostname command
Name configured in the local machine.

### Network reset
- Persisten problems might require a restart of application, service, or whole machine.
- Careful with restarting a server and impacting other users
- Also, reset network stack `Settings > Network & Internet -> Status`. It clears custom adapter configurations and network connections.

## Troubleshoot Local Network Connectivity

- If the problem isn't in the machine, there could be local network issues. 
- One way of testing local network is to try to connect to servers, file shares and printers, though this method isn't reliable as there could be applications failing on other machines as well.
- Low-level network testing tools are helpful to discard app issues as they only rely on `link` and `IP configuration`

### ping command
Tool to test if host can communicate with another host, local or remote

Steps to verify PC configuration and testing router connections:
1. ping loopback address `127.0.0.1` (Reserverd for testing purposes) => Verifies TCP/IP is installed and working correctly
2. ping IP address of workstation => Verify it was added correctly and check duplicate IP address
3. ping default gateway => Verify it's running and can communicate with a host on the local network
4. ping IP address of remote host => Verify we can communicate through the router

- Successful ping => `Reply from <ip_address>` message and Rount-trip time RTT in ms
Unsuccessful ping (3 possible messages):
1. `Reply from <sender_ip> Destination Unreachable`
    If in local network segment: It means sending host gets no ARP response (Address resolution Protocol). MAC address of destination host can't be located. Most likely destination host is not connected to switchor configured as non-discoverable. If not, IP misconfiguration, duplicate address, incorrect subnet mask
2. `Reply from <gateway_ip> Destination Unreachable` (default gateway - Router where our destination IP is)
    Gateway doesn't has no forwarding information for that IP address => Misconfiguration on Router or destination network.
3. `No Reply (request timed out)`
    Probe was sent to destination IP via gateway, but no response received => Destination host is down or configured to not respond.

- We can ping with DNS names or FQDN too, but it requires a DNS server available.

## Troubleshoot Remove Network Connectivity
Each router in the path counts as one hop (transfer from one router to another)

### tracert command
`tracert` command => Trace the path of a package to reach it's target.
Ex. `tracert 192.168.1.1` (Default gateway) or `tracert 8.8.8.8` Google's DNS server

- If host can't be located it will time out, but all the router hops will be logged

### pathping command
Alternative to tracert.
- Performs trace
- Also, pings each router individually a numbr of times to measure RTT and link latency more accurately.

If there's Router issue:
- Makes sure router Internet connection is ok
- Locate ISP's status page to verify no wider area network issues or DNS problems
- If not, try restarting the router

## Troubleshoot name resolution

If problem is not on basic connectivity, higher layers that can have issues:
- Security: Firewall could be blocking connections or bad proxy settings
- Name resolution: If DNS not working you can connect with IP address but not by name
- Application/OS: Software or OS that provides the service could crash.

When troubleshooting connectivity issues => *** Establish scope of the problem ***

### nslookup command
When problem is with DNS resolution. 
Syntax: `nslookup -option host dns_server` 

Host can be an IP or FQDN, Server is the dns server (default used if ommited). option specifies the particular lookup subcommand, for specific DNS record types.

Ex. `nslookup -type=mx comptia.org 8.8.8.8` 

## Troubleshoot network ports

### netstat command
To investigate open ports on the local host => To verify wether file sharing or email ports are open on a server
- `netstat` => Lists active and listening TCP ports
- `netstat -a` => Includes UDP ports in listening stage
- `netstat -b` => Shows process that has opened the port. `-o` to display the process ID instad of the name.
- `netstat -n` => Displays ports and addresses in numerical format.
- `-e and -s` => Report Ethernet and protocol statistics respectively.

Ports and services open without authorization pose a high security risk. Authorized services must be monitored and patched against vulnerabilities.

# Configure Windows Security Settings

## Logical Security Controls

Security Control is a safeguard to minimize risks of personal or company property. Ex. Firewall

Classes of Security Controls:
1. Physical
Ex. Doors, fences, locks.

2. Procedural
Controls applied and enforced by people.

3. Logical
Enforced by software  or cyber systems: Ex. Authentication, antivirus, firewalls

### Access Control system
- Cornerstone of logical security
- Three functions of access control system - AAA Triad: 
    1. Authentication 
    2. Authorization: Permissions to use resources
    3. Accounting: Logging who accessed resources and when

### ACL - Access Control List
- A permission is implemented as an ACL attached to each resource
- ACE Access Control Entry ids subject  (user, PC, MAC address, software service) and permission it has for the resource. Directory permission in Windows each user has unique ID (SID)
- SIDs are the only identifier used in the underlying permission entries.

### Implicit Deny
- ACL based on principle of implicit deny: Unless access granted by rule, access is denied.
- Used in Firewall policies: List of access rules, last rule is refusing the request (default)

### Least Privilege
- Minimum possible rights necessary to perform the job
- Challenging to balance a system with least privilege and having too many support requests.

## Users and Group Accounts
User account is principle mean to access computer. Two types of user account in Windows.

1. Local account
- Local to PC
- Stored in SAM (Security Account Manager) database, part of the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE key registry
- Cannot be used to access files over network or another computer

2. Microsoft account
- Indentified by an email address
- Syncronizes with a PCs local account
- Profile settings can be syncronized via online portal

### Security Group
- Collection of user accounts
- Used to assign permissions and rights
- Easier for permission assignment, as it's easier to assign them to a group than by individual user.

Built-in groups
- Administrators: 
    - All management tasks and high access to all files and objects in the system
    - Local microsoft user added to this group
- Users group
    - Standard accounts are member of Users Group
    - Able to configure settings for its profile
    - Able to use and install apps, use printers
- Guest Group
    - Present for legacy reasons: Same default permissions as Users Group
    - Guest user account disabled by default
- Power Users
    - To support legacy applications
    - Used to be a middle ground between administrators and users => Created escalation vulnerabilities
    - Windows 10/11 it has same permissions as Users Group

### Local Users and Groups
- `Local Users and Groups` management console => manage users and group accounts.

### net user command
- Command to manage users (create, modify, activate, add to groups)
`net user dmartin` => Show properties of dmartin account
`net user dmartin /active:no` => Disable dmartin user
`net localgroup Administrators dmartin /add` => Add dmartin user to Administrator group

## User Account Control (UAC)
Windows security feature to protect system from malicious scripts and attacks that can use privileges of Administrator group users.
- Least privilege security control
- User must explicitely consent to perform a privileged task
- Tasks protected by UAC have a shield icon
- We can also run processes as administrators => An explicit confirmation pop-up will show. Standard users will have to provide administrator credentials too.
- It can be annoying if performing multiple administrator tasks at the same time. => Configure notifications to appear less frequently in `User Account` applet. => Will make the system more vulnerable to malware.

## Authentication Methods

- Format of credential: Authentication Factor:
    - knowledge: Something you know like password
    - possesion: Something you have like id card
    - inherence: something you are, like fingerprints

### Multifactor authentication
- At least two authentication credentials

1. Two-step verification

- User registers trusted contact method (email, phone)
- Soft-token is generated and sent to user to verify sing-in request is authentic
- User must input the soft token within a time frame
- Soft-token also refered as One-time password (OTP)

2. Authenticator Application
- Can be used for passwordless access or as a MFA device
- Authenticator app installed to trusted device
- Service is registered to the authenticator app, typicaly with a QR code
- Prompt is created when user attempts to sign-in

3. Hard token authentication
- Implemented as an authenticator but implemented as firmware on a device: Smart card or USB
- When authenticating user connected device and authorizes it via password, pin, fingerprint reader, voice recognition.
- Compliant with Fast Identity Online (FIDO) version 2 standards

## Windows Login Option

Typical scenarios of Windows authentication:
1. Windows local sign-in
LSA (Local Security Authority) compares credentials provided with ones stored on SAM database (part of registry)
2. Windows network sign in
LSA passes credentials to network service based on SSO system called `Kerberos`
3. Remote sign in
If user not on local network, authentication can be made over VPN or web portal.

### Username and password
- Credential created  when creating user account and selecting password
- Admin can reset it on `Local Users and Groups`

### Windows Hello
- Feature that supports passwordless authentication. Options (depend on available hardware):

1. Personal Identification Number (PIN)
- Configured for each device
- Uset TPM (Trusted Platform Module) to ensure PIN not stored on device itself => Avoid interception and sniffing attacks common for passwords
- It can contain numbers, letters and symbols (despite its name)

2. Fingerprint
3. Facial Recognition
3D model of face using IR infrared sensor tomitigate spoofing attempts with photos
4. Security key: USB or mobile device with NFC sensor

### Single Sign-on
- Single log-in to access multiple services and applications on a network
- Kerberos for Active directory implements SSO
- Same auth for Windows, Windows domain's SQL Server, Exchange Server services, OneDrive, Microsoft365

- Advantage: User doesn't need to manage multiple accounts and passwords
- disadvantage: Compromise of one account compromises many services
- Password-based SSOs extremely vulnerable to attacks

Windows Hello for business seeks to mitigate this issue by:
- Devices registered to the network, private key stored on TPM and never transmitted over the network, and public on the server
- When authenticating, device communicates secret encrypted key to the network authentication server.
- Server uses public key to decrypt message and issues an authorization token to use network services and applications.

## Windows Domains and Active Directory

- Local accounts don't scale in larger organizations as they can't be used to access other computers
- Most businesses and education org use `Windows Domain networks and accounts`
- Domain account can be authorized to access any computer on the domain, as well as permissions and access to resources.

### Domain Controllers
- To create a domain you need at least 1 Windows Server computer configured as Domain Controller (DC)
- DC stores a database called Active Directory (AD)
- AD stores users, groups, computer objects and provides authentication service to users
- Domain Admins administer DCs
- Centralized, robust, scalable, and secure

### Member Server
- Server based system that joins the domain but doesn't have copy of Active Directory database
- They provide file, print or application services (Exchange, SQL server, line-of-business application)
- AD uses Kerberos protocol to provision single sign-on SSO for compatible applications and services

### Security Groups
- Domain supports security groups to assign permissions more easily
- Permissions apply to any computer in the domain (Ex. Domain Admin members cansign into any computer including DC, Domain Users cannot sign to DC devices)

- Accounts and security groups in domain are configured in the AD database stored on a Domain Controller (DC), not on each PC.

### Organizational Units (OU)
- Divides a domain into different administrative realms
- Ex. Sales department
- OUs can delegate responsabilities for department administration => Ex. A Sales manager can create/delete users for the Sales department and add them to Saes security group.

## Group Policy and Login Script

- Domain group policy configures computer settings and user profile settings
- Group policy can be used to deploy software automatically too
- Group Policy Objects (GPOs) can be applied to multiple users and computersby linking GPO to domain or OU in AD
- Multiple GPOs can be applied to a domain or OU => system of inheritance determines Resultant Set of Policies (RSoPs)

### Group Policy Update
Two command-line tools:
Policy updates are appied at sign-n and refreshed periodically(every 90 mins)
`gpupdate` => Apply new or changed policy to PC or account immediately.
    `/force` => Reapplies all policies
    `/logoff` or `/boot` => allow logoff or boot if the policy requires it

`gpresult` => Display RSoP (Resultant Set of Policies) for PC or account.
    `/s` `/u` or `/p` for specific host, user, password, or policies for desktop

### Login Scripts

- Performs configuration when user signs in.
- defined via user profile or set up via Group Policy
- To set up env variables, mapping drives to specific server-based folders, mapping to printers
- Also to enfornce security measures: Ex. Deny log-in to network if software out of date

## Mobile Device Managent (MDM)

- Software to apply security policies to mobile devices
- For enterprise devices and BYOD
- MDM logs activity of device in network and determines if allowed to connect
- It can restrict the use of apps, corporate data, and built-in functions (video and camera)

# Manage Windows Shares


# T SORO notes

# Commands
`tracert` => Show path internet traffic takes to get to end destination (Trace Route)
`ipconfig` / `ifconfig` =>
`ping`
`nslookup` => Ip address associated to a domain
`netstat` =. Report status and connections
`gpupdate` -> To force group policy update
