# Managing Security Settings

- Domain controllers send security requirements to workstations in Windows domain (For example: complex password)

## Password Best practices

- Password authentication has long history of vulnerabilities: inadequate tech and poor password practices
- Strong password important as not all companies switch to MFA

### Password rules
- Long password: +12 characters for user accounts, longer for administrative ones.
- Memorable phrase: Something you can remember, but no personal information => Anything that an attacker could find out should not be used

Common password policies
- Complexity requirements: Mix of character types 
- Password expiry: Passwords only valid for a certain period of time.

- These are sometimes deprecated as they incentivise bad practices like writting it down.

### BIOS/UEFI password
- System User password => Password before the OS can boot
    - Configured at BIOS or UEFI
    - Shared by all users so not commonly used
    - Extra security on standalone computer with no interactive logon

- System/Supervisor password
    - Potects access to firmware system-setup program
    - System user password requires System/Supervisor password

- Pre-boot authentication
    - Supported (maybe) by PCs with UEFI firmaware
    - System loads authentication application that contacts auth server and lets user submit credentials for an account

## End User Best practices

Complement good password practices with secure use of workstation:
1. Log off when not in use: Lunch Time attack. USe Starl+L to automatically lock screen.
2. Secure and protect critical hardware: From theft using a cable lock.
3. Secure Personal Identifiable Information (PII) and passwords: Careful where you put paper records. Clean desk policy.

## Account Management

Account management: What rights and privileges an employee is assigned.

### Restrict User Permissions

- File permissions: If user can read and write files on a PC or network. Responsability of user and server admin.
- Rights and privileges: what system configurations changes a user can make to a PC. Responsability of network owner.

- Permissions and rights should follow `Least Privilege` principle
- Admin accounts should be the least as possible.

### Change default administrator account and password
- OS could have active default administrator accounts (root/superuser in Linux and Administrator in Windows) => Ultimate target for hackers
- If possible these accounts should be disabled during OS installation and accessed via UAC or sudo
- If not possible to disable => Change default username and password and treat it with highest level of security.
- All uses of Administrator account should be logged

### Disable gues account
- Allows unauthenticated use and some network access-
- Disabled by default in Windows
- Enabled for passwordless files sharing in Windows Workgroup

## Account Policies
- Supplement best practices by enforcing policies and controls by OS
    - Standalone Workstation: Configured on Local Security Policy (secpol.msc) and Group Policy Editor snap-in (gpedit.msc)
    - Windows Domain: Configured on Group Policy Object (GPO) and applied to PCs and user accounts in domain and OU (Organizational Units)
    - Not available in Home Edition

### Account policies:
- Restrict login times => Limit what times a user can log in the network. Automatic logout if no authorization.
- Failed attempts lockout => Number of incorrect sign in attempts. Account gets disabled.
- Concurrent logins => Limits amount of concurrent sessions a user can open
- Timeout / screen lock => Locks system if inactive for defined time.

Unlock account or Reset password: `Properties -> Account (tab)`

## Execution Control

- Execution control is logical security technology to prevent malicious software from running on host
- Establishes security system that doesn't only rely on good behavior of user

### Trusted / Untrusted Software Sources

- Restricting users to run unauthorized code necessary to prevent malware
- Windows uses UAC (User Account Control) and Administrator and User account system to enforce restrictions

- Windows software developers can make digital signatures to prove authenticity and integrity of software package. Linux also prompts to install untrusted software.
- Mobile vendors use wall gardened model of software distribution too
- Also third party managment suites to enforce application control => blocklist or allos list

### Auto Run & Auto Play

- Legacy Windows => Optical drive would have `Auto Run` (autorun.inf) => Problem for Malware
- Modern version of Windows `Auto Play` dialog box
- Auto Play can be configured on drive's property dialog box
- UAC requires user to explicitely allow code to run => `Settings > Auto Play Actions`

## Windows Defender AntiVirus
- Many ways to install Malware on a PC even with Execution control. Or it could run things that don't require installation.
- AV (AntiVirus) software that can detect malware and prevent it fro executing
    - Uses database of patterns called definitions, signatures, and patterns.
    - Or Heuristic Identification => AV uses info of things viruses try to do.
    - AV better described as anti-malware => Not only Viruses but spyware, Trojans, rootkits, ransomware, cryptominers.

- Windows Defender AV is managed via Windows Security Center
- Installed and enabled by default

### Windows Defender AV Updated Definitions
Necessary regular AV updates:
1. Definition/patterns update: Infor on new viruses and malware. Done on Windows Update periodically.
2. Scan engine / component updates => improve or fix scan software itself

- AV can be permanently disabled via Group Policy
- You can exclude folders from scanning => Disk images, VMs (Performance problems)
    - Legit software or dev code also trigger also trigger false-positives.
- Check status of antivirus regulary







