# Comparing local network hardware

## LAN (Local Area Network)

A Local Area Network (LAN) is group of computers connected by cabling at a single geographical location.

### 802.3 Ethernet standards
Standards maintained by the Institute of Electronic Engineers (IEEE) designated as 

`x Base Y`, where:
x: Nominal data rate
y: Cable Type 

100Base-T => Fast Ethernet over copper twisted cable. 100 Mbps
1000Base-T => Gigabit Ethernet over copper twisted cable. 1 Gbps, standard choice of LAN networks
10GBase-T => 10Gbps over copper cable

* Other types of Ethernet work over fiber optic cable.

## WLAN (Wireless LAN)
Radios and antennas for data transmission. Based on `IEEE 802.11` standard (or WIFI)

Wi-fi and Ethernet technologies complement each other.

## WAN (Wide Area Networks)

A Network of multiple geographical locations. The internet is a type of WAN.
An ISP facilitates access to access to the internet from local networks.

Some companes will have a WAN to connect to LANs of the same company.

## MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)
Larger than a LAN, smaller than a WAN. restricted to a specific metropolitan area.

##  SOHO LAN
Small Office Home Office LAN is business-oriented network that gives access to both the internet and a LAN => SOHO router, internet router, boradband router.

In more complex business set ups different work areas (PCs, Server rooms, wireess devices) are connected to each other through Workgroup Switches. The workgroup switches connect the blocks to Core Distributions switches, routers, and firewalls.

** Important ** All devices connected through switches
### DMZ - Demilitarized Zone
Subnetwork to put resources exposed to the internet => Physical or logical subnetwork that separates LAN fron untrusted networks (internet). Placed between two firewalls.


## Datacenters and Storage Area Networks
Two roles of computers: Client and Server.
On Enterprise LAN servers are hosted on spearate area (Server room). If company needs a lot of servers these might be stored on a Data Center.
Most datacenters are stored in purpose-built facilities.

### DAS (Direct Attached Network)
 - Storage directly connected to servers through SCSI connections
 - Low cost, low maintenance data storage solution
 - Not for sharing data accross network
 - Not scalable
 - Suitable for small businesses that share data locally with little IT support

# NAS (Network Attached Storage)
- Dedicated storage shared through a network (Connected to a Switch)
- Allows local and remote access to data through network
- NAS is one node on a network
- Available 24/7
- Small and medium size businesses, reliable and scalable data storage

### SAN (Storage Area Network)
A Network that provisions access to storage devices that can be used by the servers. SAN is isolated from the main network (Client devices). SAN client's are servers running DBs or applications.

- Servers are connected with storage RAIDs
- Provisioning shared storage pool as a SAN is more flexible and reliable than local disks on each server machine. 
- Uses Fiber Channel and Internet SCSI (iSCSI) for connectivity.
- More complex and expensive than NAS (Network access storage)


# PAN (Personal Area Network)
Wireless connetivity of devices in proximity, laptops, mobile, printers, video display. Use of PAN is growing as use of IoT devices grows.

# Network Hardware

## Network Interface Card (NIC)
- Ethernet goes through twisted copper cable or fiber optic cable.
- Most NIC cards have a 1000Base-T compatible adapter.
- With NIC adapter it can support other Ethernet types, like fiber optic.
- NIC with multiple ports can bond together to create a faster speed.

### Media Access Control (MAC Address)
Each NIC has a unique hardware/physical address called the mac address.
- Each Ethernet frame identifies source and destination MAC address in its header.
- 49 binary digits, six bytes in size.
- Typically represented as 12 hexadecimal digits, separated by colon, hyphen or nothing.

#### ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
To discover the MAC address associated with an IP address

## Patch pannels
- Computers are connected though the wall socket to a patch pannel. 
- Wall cables end up on a insulation displacement connector (IDC) on the back of th patch pannel.
- Back panel cables are sturdier and not as flexible, designed to not be disconnected often.
- Front of the patch panel has pre-wired RJ45 cables.
- A patch cord is used to connect a port to an ethernet switch.
- It's important to label the patch panel correctly.

## Hubs

- Legacy connections
- 10BAse-T and 100Base-T
- Star topology
- A hub has a number of ports (4-48) to which different devices connect
- Collision domain => Each PC receives the traffic from all other computers and ignores the ones not addressed to their MAC address.
- Performance reduced when a lot of computers in same collision domain.
- Not compatible with Gigabit ehternet
- Device in the LAN

## Switches

- Switch is like a hub but it routes messages to different PCs by their MAC address.
- It forwards each frame to the corresponding port efficiently
- Each switch port is in a separate collision domain
- When a computer sends a frame, switch reads MAC address and adds it to it's table list.
- IS a device in the LAN

### Installation
- Selecting a switch is not easy, as they have very specific use cases and are expensive.
- Where to put it
    - Small => Underneath desk
    - Larger => Server room
- Consider airflow when installing Switches and cable management => Switches airflow from left to right.
- Patch panel makes it easier to switch connections
- Colored cables to identify what device it is (voip phone, pc) or which department it belongs to.
- Fiber connectors to Switch => Trunks to provide redundancy of the network
- Power
    - Ideally each switch connected to a separate circuit and UPSs, to make it more resilient
    - Some plugs look like standard computer D plugs, but they have a little notch => higher gauge
    - If it's a layer-2 switch you can start using it when you plug it in
    - More advanced (CISCO) switches require more work => They run tests first and give you a prompt to configure
    - After that it gives port list
- Verify that it s funcitoning => Link lights start flickering (traffic)

### Unmanaged and managed switches

#### Unmanaged
- Works out of the box with no configuration, 4-8 ports
- ISP routers come with a built-in switch (usually 4 ports)
    - On older SOHO routers, LAN interfaces implemented as HUB => Don't support Gigabit connection

#### Managed
- For larger LANs (24-48 ports)
- Works as unmanaged switch out-of-the-box
- Administrator can configure it over managment port (Web UI or CLI)
- Designed to be bolted to standard racks
- They have uplink ports to be connected to other switches
- Modular switches => Fast communication backplane to interconnect multiple switch units. Individual power supply.

### Router
Router is to connect the LAN to the WAN (Wide area Network)

## Power over Ethernet (PoE)
Supply power from a switch port to a powered device (PD) through ordinary cabling (VOIP phone, handset, camera, wirelessa access point)
Several IEEE standards:
- 802.3af (PoE) => Maximum of 13W. 350mA @ 48V
- 802.3at (PoE+) => Max 25W, max current 600mA
- 802.3bt (PoE++) => Max 51W (Type 3) or 73W (Type 4)

- PoE enabled switch (ensdpan Power Sourcing Equipment - PSE) => When connecting to a PoE switch, the Switch detects wether the device is PoE-enabled. If so, it supplies current.
- More efficient to power devices through this port than a wall-socket AC adapter for each appliance => Software enables power saving.
- If Switch doesn't provide PoE a `Power Injector (midspace)` can be used (Cable can't exceed 100m)

# Network cables

## Unshielded Twisted Pair (UTP)
- 4 pairs of twisted copper cables
- Each pair twisted at different rate to avoid interferance
- Balanced signals
- Reliable over limited range, as signal suffer attenuation
- Max 100m (328 feet)

## Shielded Twisted Pair (STP)
- Extra interference protection (for high interference environments)
- Used in 10G Ethernet and Datacenters
    - Screened cable (ScTP or F/UTP): Outer foil shield around all pairs. Designed as Screened Twisted cable (ScTP)
    - Fully shielded cable (S/FTP): Braided outer screen and foil shielded pairs. =>  Shielded foiled twisted pair (S/FTP)

## CAT standards
Particular Twisted Cable construction method. Higher Cat Rates support higher data rates.
- Specifications printed on the cable

Cat 5  | 100 MBps  | 100m | 100Base-T (Fast Ethernet)
- No longer commercially availabe

Cat 5e | 1 GBps    | 100m | 1000Base-T (Gigabit Ethernet)
 - Ok for client computer Gigabit Ethernet

Cat 6  | 1GBps or 10 GBps | 100m or 50m | 1000Base-T or 10GBase-T (1Gb or 10Gb Ethernet)
 - More reliable for Gigabit Ethernet

Cat 6A | 10 GBps | 100m | 10GBBase-T (10GB Ethernet)
- Bulkier than other cables
- Harder to fit on pathways designed for other cables.
- TIA/EIA recommends CAT 6A for Healthcare facilities with PoE++ 802.3bt installations

## Copper Cabling Connectors

Twisted pair cables can be connected to `RJ45` connectors (Ethernet connectors or 8P8C - eight position eight contact)

Two methods to connect cables, all they do is swap greens and oranges:

`T568A` => pin 1 green-white | pin 3 orange-white | pin 6 orange
`T568B` => pin 1 and 2 orange, pin 3 and 6 green (most common)
- Try to use same termination method consistently
- Mixing them creates a crossover cable. Gigabit Ethernet interfaces can create a crossover automatically.

Also, two-pair twisted pair cables can be connected to an `RJ11` connector (telephone) and DSL modems.

### Copper cable installation tools
[Video reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWhoJp8UQpo)

Structured Cabling System =>
- PC NIC connected to wall using a flexible patch chords
- Permanent cable behind wall connects to Patch Panel
- Patch panel connected to Ethernet Switch

Two types of cable termination:
- RJ45
- IDC: Permanent Cable connected to wall and Patch Panel using Insuation Displacement Connector (IDC) or `punchdown blocks`

Tools:
- Cable strippers => Strips the outer jacket of cable without damaging cable or inner insulation.
- Punchdown tools => Fix each conductor to an IDC
    - Don't untwiste more than 13mm of wire to avoid interference
- Crimpers => Fix a RJ connector jack to the Twisted Pair patch cable

### Testing tools

Cable Tester
A two-part device to test each connection on the RJ45 connector. If connection works an LED will light up.
- LEDs should light up in the same sequence on both, otherwise cables are mixed up.

Toner Probe
To identify a cable from within a bundle. Useful when cables havent been labeld properly. Continuous audio signal on the cable.

Loopback plug
Used to test a NIC or Switch Port. Basically a RJ45 connector connected to itself in a loop. When connecting a solid LED should display.

## Network Taps
Device used to intercept a network signal and send it to a package or protocol analyzer
- Passive Test Access Point:
    - Makes a copy of the original package and routes it in another direction
    - Original signal goes to the output unadultered
    - No logic decisions
- Active TAP
    - Powered device that does signal regeneration
    - It can become a point of failure due to being active.
- Switched Port Analyzer (SPAN)
    - Used for network sniffing
    - mirror port receives copies of frames addressed to nominated access ports.

### Copper Cable Installation Considerations
Specific cables must be used in certain scenarios due to building regulations and fire codes.

#### Plenum Cable
- Cable used in building voids designed to be fire-resistant
- Plenum space is usually a false ceiling that is an effective conduit of fire.
- Treated PVC or Fluorinated ethylene Polymer (FEP) => Less flexible
- MArked as CPM on the jacket

General purpose cables marked as CMG or MMG (PVC jackets) / CM or MP for plenum-rated cables.

#### Direct burial
Outside Plant (OSP) => Cable designed to run on external walls, or between buildings
- Can be exposed to high temperatures, damp conditions
- Aerial cable => Used outside between poles. Exposed to UV rays.
- Direct Burial => Cable covered with dirt or cement.

- Special coatings to protect UV and abrasion, filled with gel for extreme temperature or damp conditions, even armored against rodent chewing.

## Optical Cabling
Light is not susceptible to interference and suffers less attenuation. Optical cables support higher bandwidth and longer cable runs.

Single-Mode Fiber (SMF): Up to 10GBps. Deisgned to carry long wavelength infrared signal, 8-10 micron core.
Multi-Mode Fiber (MMF): More suitable for LAN and WAN. Less expensive and coherent LEDs. Shorted wavelength infrared light. 62.5 or 50 microns.

### Connectors
 - Straight Tip (ST): bayonet stlye connector. Push and twist lock. Used in older multi-mode networks.
 - Subscriber Connector (SC): Push/pull design. Can be used for single or multi mode.
 - Lucent Connector (LC): Small form factor connector, push/pull design. Similar to SC but smaller => higher port density.

 - Easy to damage, shouldn't plu and unplug often

 ## Coaxial cable
 Uses two conductors that share the same axis to achieve balancing.
 - central cable enclosed on plastic insulation
 - Second wire mesh serves as ground and EMI shielding
 - Mostly used in CCTV and broadband cable modems.

 # Wireless Networking types
- Wireless communication uses radio waves with antennas tuned to listen certain frequencies
- Most wireless LANs (WLANs) adopt the IEEE 802.11 standard commonly called WiFi
- Infrastructure mode => devices configured to connect to the network via an Access Point (AP)
- MAC address of the APs radio is used as the Basic Service Set Identifier (BSSID)
- AP can server as wireless access point but also a bridge to other wired devices.
- Wired network: Distribution System (DS)
- Enterprise Network will likely use PoE to power APs over data cabling

## IEEE 802.11a and 5GHz frequency band
- Wifi devices operate on specific frequency band
- Each frequency band is split into smaller bands called channels

### 2.4 GHz frequency band
- Higher risk of interference (microwaves and buetooth operate here)
- Doesn't support a big number of channels
- Data rates are lower than with 5GHz
- Better for communications through solids (walls) because of longer wavelength
- Higher range (45m)

### 5 GHz frequency band
- Worse for communications through solids and less range
- Supports more individual channels / less congested
- Higher data rates and shorter ranges (30m)

### 5GHz frequency band
- IEEE 812.11a only supports 5GHz
- Max 54MBps
- Subdivided in 26 channels of 20MHz
- Devices must implement Dynamic frequency selection (DFS) to prevent signals interfering with each other and with radar and satellite communications.

### 2.4 GHz frequency band
- IEEE 802.11b uses 2.4GHz and was release in parallel to 802.11a
- Nominal rate of 11MBps
- Divided in 14 channels of 5MHz intervals
- 802.11b channels overlap considerably, as spacing in 5MHz and WiFi requires 20MHz bandwidth

### 802.11g
- Upgrade from 802.11b in the 2.4GHz band
- Same encoding mechanism that802.11b => 54MBps rate
- 14 channels

### 802.11N (WiFi 4)
- Can work on both 2.4GHz and 5GHz, each implemented by a different radio
- `Dual band`: An AP that supports both bands is called dual band.
- `Channel Bonding`: Two adjacent 20MHz bands into a combined 40MHz channel => Only on 5GHz band
- `Multiple Inpute Multiple Output (MIMO)` Increased reliability: Multiplexing signal streams from 2-3 antennas
- 72Mbs Nominal rate, 150Mbs on combined 40MHz band.
- Access points marked as `Nxxx` where xxx is the nominal rate.

### 802.11ac WiFi 5
- Only on 5GHz band
- tri-band AP: one 2.4GHz radio, two 5GHz radios
- Allows 80MHz and 160MHz bonded channels
- 80MHz stream => 433 MBps
- Marketed using AC values. Ex. AC5300

#### Multiuser MIMO (MU-MIMO)
- In regulat 802.11 bandwidth is shared by all devices and an AP can connect with one station at a time => Same problem as legacy Ethernet Hubs
- WiFi 5 allows for APs to use different antennas to serve different clients simultaneously

### 802.11ax WiFi 6
- Improves data rate on 80MHz channel to 600MBps
- Works on both 2.4Hz and 5GHz bands
- Adds support for new 6GHz frequency band => Less range but more frequency space
- WiFi 6 supports up to 8 different clients
- Supports MU-MIMO
- OFDMA: Wifi 6 introduces Orthogonal Fequency Division Multiple Access, can work alongside MIMOto improve client density.

## Wireless LAN installation
- Clients identify WLAN through network name or Service Set Identifier (SSID)
- Choose same or different name for 2.4 and 5 GHz connections
- If same SSID, device will automatically select based on strongest connection
- Select Operation mode => Support for legacy devices (Can reduce performance if supporting legacy devices)
- Configure channel number and wether to use channel bonding => Multiple APs can be configured to use non-overlapping channels

## WiFi Analyzers
- Software to measure WiFi signal strength for the AP the client is connected to.
- Signal strength measured in decibels (0dBm = 1mW - 1 Milliwatt)
- Signals closer to 0dBm are better
- Singal to Noise ratio (SNR) => Comparative strength of signal vs background noise.
- Noise measured in dBm too, but values close to 0dBm are not good

## Long-Range Fixed wireless
- Wireless tech can be used to bridge two networks instead of laying cable.
- Point-to-Point line-of-sight => High gain microwave antennas pointed at each ther in tall buildings. Transmit signals up to 30 miles
- Can be implemented using licensed or unlicensed frequency spectrums.
    - If licensed, network operator can legally shut down any other network in the spectrum
- Unlicensed => Public frequency band (900Mhz, 2.4GHz, 5GHz). Power output is regulated to avoid interference.
Wireless signal power components:
    1. Transmit Power (measured in dB)
    2. Antenna gain => Amount signal is boosted. Measured in decibel isotropic (dBi)
    3. Effective Isotropic radiated Power (EIRP) => Sum of transit power and gain (dBm)

- Lower frequencies have stricter power limits than higher frequencies.

## Bluetooth, RFID, and NFC
Other wireless tech for Personal Area Network (PAN)

### Bluetooth
- To connect peripheral devices to laptops and mobile devices
- Radio communication up to 3MBps
- Newer versions with range of 100feet
- They use an authenticating procedure to transmit data securely
- BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) => For mobile devices

### RFID (Radio Frequency Id)
- Tag with data written into it, can be passive or active
- For access badges

### Near Field Communications (NFC)
- Peer to peer version of RFID
- Two inch range (6cm)
- Used for contactless payment, security ID