# Mobile Devices and Peripherals
Laptops, smartphones, tablets.

## Mobile display types
Mobile devices have a form factor that integrates system components and peripherals.

### Liquid Crystal Displays (LCD)
- Liquid Crystal compound that changes properties with voltage
- Pixels are 3-RGB subpixels
- In modern computer and mobile devices displays Thin-Film Transitors (TFT) is used

Three types of TFT (Thin-Film Transistors)
1. Twisted Nematic (TN)
- Cyrstals twist or untwist based on voltage
- Fast response times
- You have to be in front of the display, from the sides color inversion
- Earliest type of TFT tech

2. In Plane-Switching (IPS)
- Rotating crystals
- Better color and angle range **
- Early and cheaper ISP slightly worse response time
- More expensive than TN

3. Vertical Alignment (VA)
- Crystals tilt
- Illumination by LEDs
- Used by smartphones
- Best contast ration
- Wide color gamut
- Good intermediate between TN and IPS

Important:
- Refresh rates and response times are important features to evaluate an LCD display

### Backlights

1. Cold Cathode Fluorescent Bulbs (CCFL) 
- Flourescent lamp used in older laptops
- Need more power
- AC current required => inverter necessary to transform the DC provided by the motherboard.
- Thicker than LEDs

2. LED-backlit LCD display
- LEDs around the edge of screen
- Array of LEDs behind the screen
- More modern laptops

### Organic LED Displays (OLED)
- Each pixel by a separate LED => Doesn't require separate backlight
- Thinner, lighter, less power, and better contrast ratios
- Can be made of plastic, no glass needed => Flexible
- Less Maximum brightness than regular LCD
- More susceptible to burn-in => Retaining image after a static image for many hours

## Mobile Display Components
The display layer is only one layer on a mobile device's screen

### Digitizer functions (Touch screen)
- Placed between protective glass and display
- Grid of sensors
- Capacitive digitizers => support multitouch and gestures
- Screen covered by scratch resistant glass and, optionally, an extra protection layer
- Avoid bubbling with the screen protector to avoid issues with the digitizer

### Rotating and removable screens
- Accelerometers and gyroscopes can track the orientation of the device
- Some laptops with touch screens have dettachable keyboards

## Mobile Device accesories

- Touchpads: Embedded panel on laptop for pointer control
- Trackpads: Sometimes same as touchpad, but also as a peripheral device
- Drawing pads: Large-format touch device for sketching in digital art.

### Touch pens
- They can be device specific digitizers

### Microphone, speaker, camera
- Integrated to mobile device
- Also external headsets
- Webcam: Can have LED to illuminate the subject

## Wireless accesories
They can connect via:
- Bluetooth
- NFC (Near Field Communication)
- IR (Infrared)

## WiFi-Networking

- All mobile devices support a wifi radio network
- You can enable/disable wifi as well as cellular data network
- Airplane mode disables all or most of he radio wireless features (cellular data, WiFi, GPS, Bluetooth, NFC)
- WiFi and cellular network antennas are wrapped around the device and connected to the adapter with internal wiring

## Cellular Data Networking

- Connecting to the internet over the carriers cellular network
- Data depends on support fo device and cell tower
- Charges on amount of data transfered. International Roaming particulary expensive.

## GSM vs CDMA

- GSM allows the use of a SIM (subscriber Identity Module) card to use unlocked handset. Adopted globally and by At&T and T-mobile in the US.
    - Multiplexing

- CDMA means handset is directly managed by the provider, no SIM. Limited to Verizon and Sprint.
- With CDMA a Preferred Roaming List (PRL) provides the information for the device to connect to the cellular network => Where all appropiate towers are, updated with an OTA update.
- LTE => All 4G and 5G connections require a SIM card

### Cellular Network Data indicators
Icon on the status bar shows which type of connections is established

- G, E (GSM) or 1x (CDMA) represent minimal 2G connections (50-400kbps) => Good for voice, not data
- 3G (UMTS in GSM / EV-DO CDMA). Upto 3MBps
- H/H+ => High Speed Packet Access, up to 42Mbps, likely lower.
- 4G/4G+ => LTE-Advanced. 20-90Mbps usually, up to 300Mbps
- 5G - Supposedly up to 1GBps, reallistically between 50Mbps-300Mbps

### Enable and disable cellular data
- Besides enable/disable, there's more fine grained configurations like caps and allowing/disallowing cetrain apps to use.

### Mobile Hotspots and Tethering
- Mobile devices can be configured as mobile hotspots to provide internet over cellular network to other devices on the 802.11 (WiFi) standard
- Tethering is connecting other device to the internet via bluetooth or USB

## Mobile device wired connection
Mobile devices/ Laptops support wired connections
- Laptop ports: HDMI, DP, USB, USB-C, RJ-45
- Android: USB-C, Micro-B USB, Mini-B, 
- Serial interfaces
    - Not a lot of mobile devices have hardware serial ports
    - Software Serial Port often used for programming and to connect other type of devices
    -  Serial interface called Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART)
        - On Android over USB or Bluetooth
        - iOS doesn't allow serial connections through lightning port, except for developer programs

## Bluetooth Wireless connections
Wireless accessory connection better than wires on mobile devices.

- Bluetooth needs to be enabled
- Both accesory and device must be put on "Discovery Mode" to establish connection
- Pairing should generate pin or access code automatically to accept the connection
- Test bluetooth connection by connecting to a device (music for example), or sending a file.
- Check that both are discoverable if connection can't be established

## Near Field Communication wireless connection
- Some mobile devices have NFC chips built-in
- 20cm / 8in data transmission
- Allows for payments in contactless point-of-sale (PoS) machines
- Device doesn't transmit Credit Card info on payment, but generates a one-time token that is validated when making a payment.
- Device has to be unlocked to start a transaction
- NFC also allows to establish bluetooth connections

## Port Replicators and Docking Stations

- Port replicators are connected to a laptop device to provide more connection ports (HUB)
- Docking station. Sophisticated port replicator that supports add-in cards. When docked laptop can function as a desktop machine. Often used just for port replication.
- Smartpone/tablet docks: Connects device to peripherals (mouse, keyboard, monitor) to make it work like a laptop.

# Configure Mobile Device Apps

## Mobile Apps

### iOS apps
- Wall-gardened apps distributed over App store.
- Apps: free to use, in-app purchases, and paid
- Developed in XCode IDE and Swift programming language.

### Android apps
- Available on Google Play and third-party sites
- Java-based IDE, Android studio available in Linux, Windows and Mac

### Permissions
- Apps run in a sandbox and only have permissions given by the user
- Permissions can be revoked later

## Account Setup
- Mobile devices designed for one user (Apple Id or Google account)
- Devices can be syncronized via vendor cloud solutions
    - Microsoft 365
    - Google Cloud
    - iCloud
- Sub-accounts can be set up for services not linked to central account. Each app can have sub account.

## Types of Data to Synchronize
- Sync is copying data back and forth between devices 
    - Contacts (vCard)
    - Calendar => iCalendar format allows to share calendar data between services
    - Mail
    - Photo, Video => , main issuie with sync is they use a lot of space, different formats, version history
    - Apps
    - Passwords => Password saved to devices can be syncronized with cloud services (Security risk)

## Email Configuration options

### Commercial Provider email configuration
- OS can auto-Discover connection settings
- Autodiscover: Sepcial DNS records that specify how an account should be configured
- Enable autodiscover and enter email and credentials

### ISP and Corporate email config
- User/email, password, host address, and TLS option have to be added to configure Microsoft Exchange email
- If Autodiscover not available:
    - FQDN or IP address of IMAP or PoP3 incoming server (Choose IMAP if accessing the email from different devices)
    - Set outgoing SMTP server
    - Enable / Disable TLS (If email provider supports it)
    - Default or email provider custom ports

## Synchronization methods
- Devices are these days backed up automatically on the cloud if given permission
- Establish data caps when synchronizing large amounts of data
- Limit sync over cellular network to avoid big charges

### Sync to PC
You can sync Android to a Windows PC over a USB cable or bluetooth

### Sync to cars
- Cars come with built-in navigation and entertainment
- A mobile device can drive the "Head" of the unit and control navigation and media playback (Apple CarPlay and Android Auto)

## Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM)
Software to apply security policies to the use of mobile devices and apps in an enterprise
Two main functions:
1. Mobile Device Management (MDM): Policies for auth, feature use and connectivity
2. Mobile Application Management (MAM): policies for apps to process corporate data.

Examples:
VMWare's Workspace One, Microsoft's Endpoint Manager, Citrix's Ednpoint Management, Apple's Business Manager

- Device enrolled in MAM software can only run approved corporate apps
- Storage of personal vs corporate data can be kept separate
- Blocks forwarding of corporate data and Data Loss Prevention (DLP)

## Two-Factor Authentication
- When enrolled with enterprise management app, user could have to reauthenticate to access corporate workspace because of policies
- Two-factor authentication => User submits two different credentials to authenticate (Ex. Fingerprint and Pin)
    - Authenticator app, trusted email, registered phone number.

## Location Services
Location service of a device uses two systems:
1. GPS. Satellite positioning. Not all mobile devices have it.
2. IPS - Indoor Positioning System: Triangulation based on distance from radio sources such as cellular twoers, WiFI APs, Bluetooth/RFID beacons.

- Only available to apps for which user has granted explicit access.
- Some mobile devices has Magnetometer, that can determine the direction of the device

# Install and Configure Laptop Hardware
Fixing and upgrading laptops is harder, but still possible, as they have some upgradable components.

## Laptop Disassembly Process

### Hand tools
- Screws usually smaller and much easier to strip
- Label screws and position/orientation of cables => Take pctures if necessary

### Form Factors and plastic frames
- Get manufacturers documentation before begining an upgrade or replacement process => Only do this if there's no warranty

## Battery Replacement

- Laptops use an externeal AC adapter to conver wall current to DC. Normally they're auto-switching 110-220 V / 50/60Hz
- Fixed 110 to 220 V current will damage the adapter (Not the other way round)
- AC adapters rated on their power output.

### Battery power
- Removable rechargabke Lithium ion (Li-ion) battery parts (6, 9 or 12 cells)
- Disconnect from AC outlet and turn off machine before inserting or removing battery
- Laptop should come with power management driver to prevent repeated trickle charging from damaging it
- Life is affected by being at 0% or constantly at 100% charge
- Li-on batteries are sensitive to heat
- If storing, charge it to 40% and store it below 20C
- Typically they last aroung 2-3 years

### RAM and Adapter replacement
- Laptop RAM is packaged in a Small Outline DIMM (SODIMM) form factor.
- A SODIMM slot only accepts a specific kind of DDR (Ex. DDR3, DDR4)
- Keyed slots to prevent incompatible modules being installed
- Slot pops-up at 45 degrees.
- ** Also Mini-DIMM and Micro-DIMM form factors for ultra-portable devices **

DIMM visualizations: https://www.itechtics.com/dimm-sodimm-microdimm/

### Upgrading adapter cards
- Modem adapters, wireless cards, SSD storage are usually replaceable via screw-down panels (Mini PCIe, M.2, mSATA)
- When changing wireless adapters the antennas for radio communications need to be reinstalled
- You can add GSM adapters too that require a SIM.

## Disk Upgrade and Replacement

- Laptops only support one storage disk. To change it you must have a migration plan.
- Migration: Using software to create an Image of the drive and store it in a USB drive. You can then restore the system.
- New Drive must me equal or larger than the old drive to be able to clone it.
- Replacement: Only data is backed up from the old drive.

- Laptop HDD are usually 2.5in form factor and 9,5mm height, or 1.8in. Magnetic 2.5 HDD tend to be slower compared to 3.5 in from desktops.
- HDD tend to be slower and have less capacity.
- Ultraportable laptop could require 7mm (thin) or 5mm (ultra thin) drive

## Keyboard and Security Component Replacement
- It can be cheaper to replace components than get a new laptop

### Keyboard and trackpad
- You will need to find the exact one that fits
- It could require completely disassembling the chasis
- Connects to motherboard via flat ribbon cable (usually) secured by a latch
- Use OS/driver setting utility or app to configure it

### Key replacement
- Replace carefully

### Biometric security component
- Fingerprint reader attached to the motherboard by ribbon cable like the keyboard

### Near field Scanner
- To pair peripheral devices or connect to smartphones
- NFC sensor must be connected to an antenna

# Troubleshoot mobile devices

## Power and battery issues
- Battery damage => Danger. If it gets punctured it can catch on fire. Face coverings and sand buckets.
- Power management options in device

If laptop doesn't turn on:
- Check battery correctly snaped
- Make sure contacts aren't dirty or blocked => Use swabs
- Poor health battery will not hold a charge

Other considerations;
- Keep cooling vents clear to avoid overheating
- Used compressed air to clear debris and dust from components

## Improper charging symptoms
 - Use manufacturer charger or approved replacement, DC jack, and cable integrity  => Wrong charger or exposing battery to heat can lead to explosion
 - A Li-on Battery shouldn't reach 0% or be permanently at 100% as it reduces battery life

## Swollen battery symptom
- If battery swells, stop using the mobile device (wobbles, or deformed touchpad/keyboard)
- Swollen battery is a problem with charging circuit, that prevents over charge
- Fire hazard and chemicals
- Contact manufacturer for disposal instructions

## Hardware failure issues

### Overheating Symptoms
- Vents blocked by putting device on soft surface, lap. Use laptop coolers if needed.
- Dust in vents
- High screen brightness and flashlight can rapidly heat hand-held devices
- Direct sunlight
- Devices have emergency shutdown for when it reaches limit temperatures

### Liquid Damage Symptoms
- Ingress Protection scale (IP) rates the water protection of a device => IP67 (6 repelling solids, 7 repelling liquids)
- Liquid damage might be visible on the screen
- Drain and fully dissasemble device for drying and clean contacts. Battery should be replaced.

### Physically damaged port symptoms
- Improper insertion of cables can damage ports => Intermittent connection or failure to charge

## Screen and calibration issues

If screen doesn't display try to insulate the issue: Graphics card, LED backlight, fluorecent light (old laptops). Make sure hinges switches are not stuck.

### Broken screen
- Broken screens on mobile phones are usually replaced by manufacturer
- Digitizer can be damaged by water without visible symptoms

### Digitizer issues
- Fingers and screen must be clean and dry
- No bubbles on screen protector
- Check that it's not a software issue (restart device)
- Test another location in case of electromagnetic interference
- See if wires were correctly installed after repair. Ask "What has changed?"
- If possible, uninstall and reinstall touchscreen drivers

### Cursor / drift calibration
- Make sure cursor is not too or too little sensitive
- Cursor issues could be due to many apps running
- Disable trackpad if user accidentally touching it
- Update device drivers

### Connectivity issues (wirelles bluetooth or cellular connection)

Similar to PC wireless connectivity, problems can be hardware or software.

Troubleshooting:
- Make sure adapter enabled
- Check antenna connection if laptop recently serviced
- Check battery of external bluetooth device
- Drivers of network device if problems with coming back from hybernation
- Make sure wireless adapter is not switched off by accident
- Make sure Airplane mode is not enabled

Intermitent connectivity
- Move devices closer together
- Change position of device (depending on the device, some work better in certain positions due to the antenna placement)
- Use WiFI analyzer
- GSM Signal Monitor or Cell Tower Analyzer for cellular radio signals

## Malware issues

- Malware apps collect data on the background. They can become unresponsive or not shut down when closed.
- Data transmission capacity is a common symptom of malware present => Set limit triggers to monitor the data usage
- Malware can use camera or mic. Check that camera LED is not active.


Review

- Exam Objective 1.4 (220-1101) / MDM - MAM
- Exam Objective 5.5 (220-1101) - Ingress Protection
