# Printers

## Unboxing and setup location

- Main technologies: inkjet, laser

### Properties of printers
- Page per minute (ppm): Varies depending on type of print.
- Maximum supported resolution: Dots-per-inch (DPI). Not the same as pixels per inch (ppi)
    - Horizontal resolution determined by printer engine
    - Vertical resolution determined by paper handling mechanism
- Paper handling: Types of paper and sizes
    - Overloading will cause paper jams => In high output situations like an office high load capacity is important
- Options and functionlities: Duplex unit (both sides paper automatically), finisher (folding, stabling, hole punching)

### Setup location
- Near power outlet with clear and well managed cables, on a flat surface
- Space for airflow, ventilation (for Ozone), and not in sunlight. Paper stored with no humidity or extreme temperatures
- Consider distruption to employees in its placement and if it prints confidential information

### Unboxing

- Handle with care
- Remove strips and supports of printers components before switching it on
- Leave printer to acclimate for 24 hrs before using to reduce risk of condensation. Same with paper.

## Print device connectivity

Printers support a range of connection interfaces

### USB
- Type B connector
- Usually PC will detect model of printer and install drivers automatically (Windows)
- Linux uses drivereless Internet Printing Protocol (IPP) for printers so no driver has to be installed

### Ethernet
- Most printers have an RJ-45 connector to get an IP from a DHCP server.
- Printer's IP can be stored on a host's DNS to connect via a FQDN (Fully qualified Domain Name)
- Network configuration on device's display or via a web interface

### Wireless Print Device Connectivity
- Either bluetooth or WiFi
- Two WiFi connections:
    1. Infrastructure Mode
    - Connect printer to AP and make it available to clients via an IP or FQDN
    2. WiFi direct
    - Configure software-implemented access point to print device

## Printer Drivers and Page Description Languages

- Printing apps are What you see is what you get (WYSIWYG) => What you see in the screen is what gets printed out
- Different OSs using the printer will require suitable drivers
- Plug and Play (PnP) => Windows will usually select and install the appropiate driver
- Page Description Language (PDL): Raster file with instructions for printer to place dots on a page. PDL supports:
    - Scalable fonts: Fonts defined by vendors that can be scaled with flexibility (Not old bitmaps that supported specific font sizes)
    - Vector graphics: Instructions on how drwa an image insted of pixel-by-pixel Bitmap
    - Color printing: Printers use the reflective properties of Cyan, Magenta, Yellow and Black (CMYK) instead of the RGB of screen displays. PDL supports correct translation between on-screen color and print out.
- Choice of PDL depends on compatibility with software apps:  PostSCript (Adobe), Printer Control Language - PCL (HP)

## Printer Properties
- Drivers and Apps have default configuration for a printer

Windows
- Printer properties:
    Config for printer object and underlying hardware: sharing, port, driver update, duplex setup, default paper, default tray
    About Tab: Info on the printer and drivers
- Printe Preferences

## Printer Preferences
- Sets default print job options: paper orientation, color/black-white.
- Set for general or per=job basis

### Paper quality
- size and type of paper
- draft / normal mode (save ink)
- color / grayscale

### Finishing
- duplex option
- multiple images per sheet
- portrait / landscape

## Printer sharing
- Some printers have an embedded print server => Allows clients to connect directly without going through a computer or server
- Public printer: No access controls, any guest can use
- 
### Windows Print Server Configuration
- Any device with installed printer device can share tehe printer object with other computers
- Print server ca be connected to the printer over USB or network, giving administrator more control over who can use it.
- Printer object can have permissions enabled
- Share Sharing tab in printer properties
- If connected clients have different OS, you need to install the corresponding drivers
- Windows 10: Type 4 drivers => Single driver will work with multiple devices. Specific drivers are obtained by client via Windows Update instead of from print server.

### Shared Printer Connections

- Ordinary users can connect to printer if server admin gives them access => They can look for network on Network tab on file explorer

## Printer Security

Issues: Access to print services and print out of confidential material.

### User Authentication
- Print servers can be put behind user authentication to prevent unauthorized people from using it.
- They can be configured in Print Share
- Authentication could be in the device itself

### Secure Print and Badging
- Secured print => Held in the device until user authenticates
- Release authentication with: PIN, Badge (card reader)
- Secure prints are cached for a limited time

### Audit logs
- Device can be configred to log each job
- Used to identify printed documents or to identify unauthorized release of information
- Print-device logs can be configured to be sent to a centralized log server

## Scanner configuration

- Office printers are usually Multi-function devices (MFD), that include scanners
- Optical Character Recognition (OCR) => Software to convert scanned text into characters for edit

### Scanner Types
- Flarbed scanner => Created bitmap of object by shining line at the object on a glass surface.
- Automatic Document Feeder => Passes Paper over fixed scan head (Better for multipage documents)

### Network Scan Devices
- MFD or standalone scanner be configured as a network device like a printer. On a network, scan output can be redirected:
    - Scan to email: Scanner must be configured with IP address of SMTP server
    - Server Message Block (SMB) or scan to folder: Scan stored as a file on a shared network folder.
    - Scan to cloud: File uploaded directly to cloud storage (Dropbox, OneDrive).

# Replace Print Device Consumables

## Laser Printer Imaging Process

- Cheap, fast, high quality
- Gray scale and color

1. Processing stage
Printer formatter board processes the page as bitmap (raster) and stores it in its RAM

2. Charging state
Imaging drum conditioned by the Primary Charge Roller (PCR), metal roller coated with rubber. PCT apples uniform 600V across the drum's surface.

3. Exposing stage
Photosensitive imaging drum looses charge when exposed to light. 
- Laser fires short pulse of light for each dot in raster and neutralizes charge given by the PCR.
- Pulsing light reflected with mirrors over the photosensitive imaging drum.
- Drum ends um with series of charge/no-charge dots that represent electrostatic latent image that is going to be printed.

4. Developing Stage
- Laser Toner fined compund of dyestuff (wax or plastic). Fed onto a magnetized `developer roller`
- Toner has same negative charge as imaging drum (wouldn't normally interact)
- When charge selectively removed from Imaging Drum, toner is attracter to them and sticks to those parts of the surface.
- Drum rotates to reach paper

5. Transfering stage
- Toner moves from drum into paper
- Picker roller picks up paper and Separation roller makes sure only one page is picked.
- Paper is fed to the transfer roller that applies a positive charge to one side of the paper => Attracts the toner on the drum
- Static eliminator (detac corona) removes charge from paper to avoid it sticking

6. Fusing Stage
- A Fusser assembly heats the paper to melt the toner into the page and squeezes it against a pressure roller.

7. Cleaning stage
- Photosensitive drum is cleaned of toner particles  using a cleaning blade, roller and electricity discharged
- Image Roller is smaller than a page so this process happens several times for a single page.

8. Duplex printing and output path
- Duplex assembly would turn the page to feed it again, otherwise the paper would go out using the exit rollers
- Manual duplex can be enables for person to manually turn the page. Printer pauses for this.

### Color laser printers
- They use separate toner catridges for the CMYK colors
- Some do separate runs for placing each color, others printing one pass with a transfer belt

## Laser Printer Maintenance
- They require constant maintenance and cleaning (dirt, paper dust and ink)

### Loading paper
- Use good quality paper and one that is adequate to your printing output (document or photo), and don't mix up paper designed for one printer type for another ( ex. thermal paper on a laser print)
- Position media guides at the edge of paper stack. Do not overload or add unsupported paper.
- Do not use creased (bad edges, arrugas), dirty, or damp paper. Store it in a climate control place with no excess heat, temparature or dust.

### Replacing Toner Catridge

- Drum in toner catridge is light sensitive, fir catridge in print device immediately
- Toner Catridges are Waste From Electronic Equipment (WEEE) => Follow local reglations to discard

### Cleaning Printer
- Damp cloth to clean the exterior of dust
- Dust and toner from interior with soft cloth or toner-safe vacuum (Don't use compressed air, domestic vacuum cleaner)
- Wash toner of body with cold water, avoid warm water as it can stick to skin. Use gloves and mask as Toner is toxic.
- Use alcohol with lint-free swaps to clean electronic components
- Replace printer's dust and ozone filters regulary using manufacturers recommendations

### Replacing the maintenance kit
- Laser printers need replacement of components in a scheduled fashin, with a replacement kit.
- Replace old fusers and rollers and clean the printer
- Use recycling program for old fusers and rollers.

### Calibrating printer
- Calibrating print density and color
- If print doesn't come out as expected, use calibration routine from printer's control panel or its software driver

## Inkjet Printer Imaging Process

- Good quality output
- Inkjets cheap to buy, expensive to run => Expensive consumables (Less popular on office environments)

### Process
- Firing of microscopic ink droplets onto paper
- Good quality but prone to smearing and fading

Two types of `Print Head`: 

1. Piezoelectric (Epson)
- nozzle has piezoelectric element that changes shape with electricity
- Acts a a small pump pushing ink

2. Thermal (HP, Canon, Lexmark)
- Ink is heated to create a bubble. When bubble bursts it spays ink through a noozle.
- Thermal inkjet cheaper and easier to produce
- Heating elements have short life

### Carriage System
- Carriage system moves print head back and forth
- Ink applied on only one direction or both (Bi-directional)
- Flat ribbon cable connects head to printer's motherboard
- Stepper motor advances paper when line is completed
- Lever to set platen gap (distance between print head and paper) => Allows to use thicker media/paper.

## Inkjet Maintenance
- Usually replacement of catridges and paper stock because of less print volume.

### Paper handling and duplex assembly
- Most support one paper path
- Load from top or from bottom models (input/output trays)
1. Pickup similar to Laser Printer with a roller and separation roller
2. Stepper motor detects paper and advances it to print position and moves it along
3. Eject rollers deliver paper to duplexing assembly or output bin

- Smaller paper trays than laser printers.
- Better results with more absorbent premium paper designed for in, although they can use regular laser printer paper

### Replacing Inkjet Catridges

- Normal inkjet heads are consumables, most of the time built into the ink catridge
- Piezo pieces are built to last the amount of time of the printer
- One reservoir for each of the color inks, it has a sensor for each
- Inkjet driver will prompt you to replace it when it senses it's empty

### Other Inkjet operations
- Print head alignment => To calibrate the printer if the output comes skewed
- Print head cleaning => If output has a missing line, ue printer's cleaning cycle.

## Thermal Printer Maintenance

- Thermal printer: Any printer that creates an image with heat. 
- Direct thermal printer: Most common small form factor for barcode, label, and receipt printing.
- Typically 200-300 dpi. Print speed measured on inches per second

### Direct Thermal Printing Imaging process
- Special thermal paper with checmicals that react to heat from the `heating element`
- Feed assembly moves paper with a stepper motor and a rubber coated motor.

### Direct Thermal Printer Maintenance tips
- Paper roll must be specific size and type for your printer
- Keep heat-sensitive side outwards
- Use brush or vacuum to remove debris
- Use alcohol (IPA) to clean sticky residues in th feed mechanism, or purchase cleaning cards

## Impact Printer maintenance
- Strikes ink ribbon against paper to print.
- Not as common, mostly used for receipts or invoices

### Impact Printer paper
1. Plain paper held firmly against moving roller (platen)
2. Carbon paper (Impact paper) used to make multiple copies of the same pass. Sheet of carbon paper inserted in between both pages.
3. Tractor-fed: Fitted with removable perforated side strips. Less chance of skewing or slippage since rollers fix the movement of pages.
    Ensure the holes on paper are engaged with the sprockets and paper can enter the printer cleanly.

### Impact Printer Components
- Impact printers have replaceable integrated ribbon, that sometimes does a complete loop, simplifying the design.
- Old school two-spool ribbon, requires sensor and reversing mechanism for when ribbon reaches the end.
- Handle with care when replacing Print Head, as it can become very hot.

## 3-D Printer Maintenance
- Used to create manufacturing prototypes with plastic, rubber, carbon fiber or metal alloys.
- lso used in health care for prostetics, clothing.

### Imaging process
- First a digital 3D object with a scan or by creating it in a 3d software.
- Model rendered in discrete horizontal layers / slices by either the 3D modelling software or in the 3D printer.
- File sent to printer with cable, wifi, or SD card
- Printer melts the material and adds it layer by layer

### 3D Printer components

Fussed Filament Fabrication (FFF) or Fused Deposition Model (FDM) is the most common type of 3d Printer, it lays down layers of fillament at high temperatures.

- Print bed / build plate: Flat glass plate onto which material is extruded. It must be leveld for each job (automatically or manually on cheaper models). Bery importat for rigid and stable, as vibration will mess up the prints.

- Bed / Build surface: Sheet placed on the build plate to hold object and allow easy removal. Must be the same as fillament material.

- Extruder: Equivalent to print head of an inkjet. Lays fillaments from cold end to a hot end noozle. Different sized noozles can be fitted to the extruder.

- Gears and motors: Position the extruder correctly for the print.

- Fan: Cools melted plastic to shape the object

### Fillament

- Material is Spool or fillament (1.75mm or 3mm)
- Many materials, most popular plastics are Polylactic Acid (PLA) and acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).
- Check printers material compatibility
- Change fillament: Heat the extruder, pull as much of the old fillament as possible, then push new fillament.
- Keep fillaments free from heat and humidity

### Resin and other printer types
Other common types:

Stereolithography (SLA): 
    - Liquid Plastic resin or photopolymer to create objects cured by ultraviolet laser.

Selected Laser Sintering (SLS):
    - Fuses layers together using a pulse laser.
    - Object created from powder (plastic or metal) and lowered into tank as each layer is added.

# Troubleshoot print device issues

## Printer Connectivity

- Check error code (if available)
- Check the obvious: Printer on and online.
- Check components correctly installed, service panels closed, and paper available.
- Print test page => If it works issues is with the network connection
- Cycle the power, if not perform factory reset
- Inspect USB cables and connector.

Ask: What has changed?

## Print feed issues
Connectivity ok but printer doesn't work, it could be mechanical issue

### Paper Jam
- Remove paper carefully, don't force., as it can damage the fuser and rollers.
- Diagnose the problem if paper jams are common => A lot of the times because paper is not the adequate or paper is creased, folded.
- It could be a problem with the rollers, static eliminator.
- Inkjet => Check instrution manual on how to release paper.

### Paper feed issues
Paper not feeding or feeding multiple pages:

- Paper size and weight compatible
- Check paper is in good condition (not creased, damp or dirty)
- Fan the edge of the paper to unstuck them (only once)
- If not a media problem, change the rollers.

### Grinding noise issue
- On laser printer grinding noise is problem with tiner catridge, fuser or other gears, rollers.
- Insulate the failing part, check paper path for debris
- If nothing replace printer catridge or maintenance kit.

- On Inkjet grinding noise is usually problem with carriage mechanism. Check vendor docs to reengage clutch mechanism.

## Print quality issues

### Laser print defects
- Faded prints => Toner catridge needs replacement. Run calibration test after replacement.
- Blank pages => Driver problem (usually - check correct driver). Also Toner wrongly installed, transfer roll is damaged.
- White stripes => Toner poorly distributed (gentle shake) or transfer roll / fusing roller damaged/dirty.
- Black stripes / whole page black => Primary charge roller dirty or damaged or High Voltage Power supply malfunctioning
- Speckling on output => Lose toner getting onto print, clean it.
- Vertical / Horizontal lines => Dirty feed rollers, damaged/dirty photosensitive drum.
- Toner not fused to paper =>Fuser needs replacing
- Double/echo images => Photosensitive drum not cleaned properly.
- Incorrect chroma display => Catridges in wrong location, ensure enough toner on each catridge
- Color missing: Replace catridges or clean contacts between printer and catridge.

### Inkjet Printer Defects

- Lines on print out => Blocked ink noozle, use cleaning utility.
- Most other print problems => Paper
- Persistent marks on output => Dirty feed roller
- Inconsistent color => Eeservoir running low.

### Dot Matrix print defects
- Lines in dot matrix printer => Stuck pin in the print head or affected by platen position
- Incorrect platen gap => faint printing (too wide) or smudging (too narrow)

## Finishing Issues

Finisher unit => Staples, punch holes after print is finished.
Printer settings must be configured to select the installed finisher.

### Incorrect page orientation
Make sure paper is oriented correctly so that the finishing is done on the correct side. Test it on a short run.

### Hole punch
- Make sure you don't exceed the maximum number of sheets => Send print job in smaller batches.
- Max number of sheets might depend on sheet weight (thickness)

### Stample Jam
- Also, don't exceed the max number of sheets => A staple will become bent and stuck.

## Print Job Issues
No hardware or edia issue => Check OS print queue or devices

### Print MOnitors

Print Monitor (Windows) transmits job to the printer and provides status => If problem, device sends a message back to print monitor, that will put a message on the Desktop.

### Print queue and spooler troubleshooting
- Backed-up print queue => Multiple print jobs pending but not printing => Print device offline or out of Toner or error processing a particular job.
- In Windows, go to Settings => Try restarting the job. If not delete the job and start again.

### Print Spooler
Generic term to describe a print job is passed from application and stored temporarily on the print server until the print monitor can route it to the device.

### Garbled Print issues
Garbled print => Printer prints many pages with few characters or many blank pages

- Usually happens due to an error somewhere in the path between application and print device => Cancel print job, clear print queue, cycle power of the printer (off for +30 seconds) to clear memory, and try printing again.
Other troubleshooting:

- Use OS to print a test page => problem on print function or particular application
- Try printing another file from same application => could be problem with specific file
- If problem persists, update printing driver and printer is set to use PDL (PCL or Post Script) supported by source application
- If strange characters appears on print => Check font available on PC and/or printer

