# Docker on AWS

## ESC (Elastic Container Service)

Used to launch Docker containers in AWS
- You must provision and maintain the infrastructure (EC2 instance)
- AWS takes care of starting or stopping containers
- Has integration with application Load Balancer

ECS Service will smarly allocate a Docker container to the existing EC2 instances

For Exam: Any time you wan to run docker container on AWS, this ECS

## Fargate
- Serverless Docker Containers.
Also used to deploy Docker Containers in AWS, but without provisioning EC2 instances. 
- AWS runs containers for you based on CPU/RAM requirements
- We don't need to manage EC2 instances

## ECR (Elastic Container Registry)
- Where you store and register Docker images so they can be run by ECS and Fargate
- Private Docker Registry on AWS

# Serverless
Doesn't mean there's no servers, just that as an end user you don't manage the servers.

Started as "function as a service" with lambda, but nowadays is any service that doesn't require managing, provisions or interact with servers.
Example serverless services: S3, DynamoDB, Fargate, 

# Lambda

## Why?
Having Ec2 instances means a cloud server will always be running, it's limited by CPU and RAM. It can scale but you need to add autoscaling groups.

Lambda is just functions that are time-limited. 

## Characteristics
- Intended for shorter executions (Up to 15 minutes)
- Runs on-demand.
- Automatically scales.
- Price: Pay per call and compute time (1M request free per month, 0.0000002 per request after / 400,000 GB/s for free a month, after that $1 per 600,000 GB/s). Usually VERY cheap to run lambda. For exam: pricing based on "Calls and Duration"
- Integrated with other AWS service
- Event driven: Function only get executed only when called
- Integrated with many programming languages (JS, Python, Java, C#, Golang, Ruby, Custom Runtime api)
- Easy monitoring
- Up to 10GB of RAM per function

Lambda Container Image => Some docker images can run on lambda if the docker image is compliant with the Lambda Runtime API
- ECS and Fargate is the prefered way of running arbitrary Docker Images.

Container images are a good alternative to package the dependencies of a lambda instead of the Zip file.

## Lambda examples
Example: Serverless Thumbnail creation when someone adds an image to S3
Common use: Serveress CRON job. Cloud Watch Event Bridge => AWS Lambda function task

## API Gateway
API gateways allows us to build serverless APIs

To expose a lambda function to the internet to be used as an endpoint we need API Gateway
- Serverless and scalable
- Supports RESTful APIs and Websocket Apis
- Support for security, user autherntication, API throttling, API keys, monitoring.

# AWS Batch
Fully managed batch processing at any scale.
A batch job is a process with a start and an end (as opposed to continuous)
- Batch service will dynamically launch EC2 instances or Spot instances to accomodate the load.
- Batch will provision the right amount of compute and memory required
- Just submit and schedule batch jobs and AWS batch does the rest.
- A batch is a docker image that runs on ECS (Anything that can run on ECS can run on AWS Batch)
- Helpful for cost optimizations

What is the difference between Batch and Lambda?
Lambda has time limit, serverless, limited temporary 

Batch: No time limit, any runtime as long as it's packaged as a Docker image, relies on EBS. Its managed but not serverless -> It relies on EC2 instances.

# Amazon Lightsail

Standalone service, stable and low price.
- Simpler alternative to using EC2, RDS, ELB, EBS, Route 53
- Great for people with no cloud experience

Use case: Simple web app, website (wordpress, magento, plesk, Joomla). Dev/ Test environments
It has high availability but limited AWS integrations.

For exam: For somone with no cloud experience.

## Hands on
It doesn't look like AWS, it's a different service.

### Lightwail configuration
In it you can select the OS (Linux or Windows) and the app service (Wordpress, Joomla, Magento, Mean, LAMP, Gitlab, NodeJS, Drupal)
- Add a database MYSQL or Postgres (optional)


