# Cloud Formation

Definition: Cloud Formation => Infrastructure as code

Benefits
- A declarative way of outlining infrastructure for any AWS resources.
- Avoid setting infrastructure manually, everything is code (Excellent for control)
- Cloud formation creates resources in the right order, with the exact configuration you specify.
- Cost advantage: Resources get similar tag so you can sew how much the infrastructure costs you
- You can estimate the cost using CloudFormation template
- Saving strategies: Set resources at specific times.

Productivity:
- Detroy and recreate infastructure on the fly.
- Automated generation of Diagrams for templates
- Declarative programming (No need to figure out ordering or orchestration)

Dont reinvent the wheel
- LEverage existing templates on the web
- Leverage documentation

For exam: We use Cloud formation when we need to repeat an infrastructure in different env, regions or aws accounts.

### Hands on Cloud Formation
For example on course (Cloud formation stack has to be createdin us-east-1 (Virginia))

- You can create a template or upload one with a `.yaml` file. A template is a yaml file.
- Once you have it you can estimate the cost (going away soon)

- When creating a Stack from a template, you'll be able to see all the processes going on (CREATE_IN_PROGRESS, UPDATE_IN_PROGRESS, DELETE_IN_PROGRESS, etc)
- When updating a stack you can change the template by uploading (or pushing) a new one.
- Change Set: Section to visualize what Cloud Formation will do when we change the Stack.
- Update Clean up: Once Cloud Formation updates it cleans up automatically, meaning we don't have to go and manually remove resources previously created.
- Delete Stack: Clears all the resources created for the stack, and deletes in the right order.

A good Cloud Fromation template can be deployed and re-depoyed in multiple regions and accounts.

### CDK (Cloud development kit)

A way to define your infrastructure using a familiar language: JS/TS, Python, Java, .NET instead of using .yaml files
- The code is compiled bythe CDK into a Cloud Formation template (JSON/Yaml)
- CCK CLI Allows to deploy runtime and infrastructure code at the same time
- Great for lambda functions, Docker Containers on ECS

## Beanstalk

When developing on AWS a dev doesn't want to be manually handling infrastructure, deploying code, configuring DBs and LBs, scaling,etc.

- Most applications will have a similar architecture, with a Load Balancer, and Autoscaling group (EC2 instances), Database and cache (Redis)
- Elastic BEanstalk =>  Developer centric view for deploying applications on AWS, so that devs just worry about the code.
- Beanstalk => Platform as a service (PaaS)
- Beankstalk is free, but you pay for underlying instances.

- Managed service 
- Deployment strategy configured, but performed by Beanstalk
- Capacity provisioning and load balancing managed
- Application health monitoring & responsiveness included in Beanstalk dashboard

- Developer responsability => Application code.

### Three architectures:
- Single Instance deployment => Good for dev
- LB + ASG: Good for production or pre-production (Load balaces + Auto scaling group)
- ASG only: great for non-web apps (workers)

BEanstalk supports a lot of ways of deploying application (Node, Python, Docker, multi-docker)

For exam: Beanstalk has full Health Monitoring integrated into dashboard.

### Beanstalk Hands-on


Presets:
- High Availability: includes LB

Config:
- Service Role name: Create a new elastick beanstalk role so that it can do its thing.
- EC2 Instance Profile: Create a new Role for EC2 to access Elastic Beanstalk that has AWSElasticBEanstalkWebTier, AWSElasticBeanstalkWorkerTier and , AWSElasticeanstalkMutiContainerDocker

When the Beanstalk Environment is created, as series of events will hapen, which come from Cloud Formation.
- Beankstalk is Cloud Formation on the background => You can visualize the architecture in the Cloud Formation template visualizer.
- As a difference with Beanstalk, Cloud Formation is used to deploy apps with any kind of infrastructure

## Code Deploy
- Independet service to deploy an app automatically (No Cloud Formation or Beanstalk)
- Works with EC2 instances and on-premises servers (Hybrid service)
- Works with any kind of server but you must provision it with Code Deploy agent

Handy service to transition from on-premises to AWS.

For exam: Allows to update an app from v1 to v2, on AWS and on-premise service, in a single interface

## CodeCommit

Before pushing the application to code servers, the code needs to be stored somewhere. Devs usually use a git repository.

- CodeCommit is AWS's competing code to Github
- Git-based repository
- Easily to collaborate with other devs.
- Private, secured, and integrated with other AWS services.

## CodeBuild

- Service to build code in the cloud
- Compiles source code, runs tests, and produces packages that are ready to be deployed.

Diagram:
`CodeCommit => CodeBuild => Ready-to-deploy artifacts`

- Fully managed and serverless
- Continously scalable & highly available
- Secure
- Pay as you go

## Code Pipeline
Orchestration of code deployment services.
- Basis for CICD (Continuous integration & Continuous delivery)

Example of Code Pipeline orchestration

`CodeCommit => CodeBuild => CodeDeploy => Elastic Beanstalk`

For exam: If you see code orchestration question, think Code Pipeline

## Code Artifact

Software packages have dependencies.
** Storing and retreiving dependencies => `Artifact management`
Works with common dependencies tools: npm, yarn, pip

For exam: If team needs artifact management system or place to store code dependencies.

## Code Star
Unified (Dashboard) UI to manage software development activities
- Quick way to get started to correctly set up code commit, codePipeline, codeDeploy, ElasticBeanstalk, Ec2 ...
- Can edit code in the cloud using AWS Cloud9

## Cloud9
Cloud IDE (Integrated Development Environment) for writing, running and debugging code directly in the cloud.
- Classic IDE's are downloaded into the computer first, Cloud IDE allows for software development from any place or machine without setup.
- Allows for code collaboration in real time.

### CodeStart / Cloud9

You can set up a whole project sith CodeStart and select templates (For example Express / Beanstalk). CodeStart will set up the whole repo, build, test, deploy pipeline for you.

After that, you can set up a Cloud9 IDE to develop the project in the browser, from any machine.


