## Global application
A global application is deployed in multiple geographies => In aws multiple regions or edge locations.
Reasons to do this:
- Decreased latency for users around the world. Deploy app closer to users => Better experience
- Disaster recovery
If entire aws region goes down, you can fail over to another region. => INcrease availability application
- In case app under attack
Distributed global infrastructure is harder to attack

## Global AWS infrastructure
`https://infrastructure.aws`

- Regions
- Availability zones =>  Many locations in an availability zone
- Points of Presence => For content delivery networks, not app deployment (Cloud Front)
- Edge locations => Content delivery close to user
- Networks => Physical cables to connect different regions

## What we will learn
- Global DNS: Route 53 => Route user to closest deploymeny with least latency
- Global Content Delivery Network (CDN): Cloudfront => Replicate part of our appliction to AWS Edge locations.
- S3 Transer Acceleration => Accelerate uploads and downloads from s3
- AWS Global accelerator => IMprove global application availability using AWS global network

## Route 53
S3: Managed DNS (Domain name system).

DNS => Collection of rules and records to help users reach servers through URLs

### Records
A Record: Host name to IPv4 address (32.23.34.21)
AAAA Record: Host to IPv6 address
CNAME => Host name to host name
Alias Record => Host name into AWS resource (ELB, S3, RDS, CloudFront)

For exam: Routing Policies

- Simple routeing policy => No health checks (Browser sends domain to Route 53, and Route 53 returns Ip address of associated server)
- Weighted Routing Policy
Multiple EC2 instance servers with different weights assigned. DNS assigns traffic with the corresponding weight (Like a load balancer), and does a health check.
- Latency routing policy
Looks at where the user is located and routes to the server with the least latency. It does a health check.
- Failover routing policy
There's a primary and failover server, so Route S3 first does a health check on the primary. If it fails it's redirected to the failover server. Good for disaster recovery.




