# Virtual Private Cloud

## Ip Addresses in AWS
Two kinds ipv4 & ipv6

### Public ipv4
Whenever we create an EC2 instance we get a new public ipv4 address every time we restart it.

### Private ipv4
Private ip address that can be used on private networds (LAN) to communicate services inside AWS.
- Private Ip address is fixed for EC2 instances (Even when stopped and start)

### Elastic IP
- Allows to attach a fixed ipv4 address to an instance, even if stopped.
- It has ongoing cost, even if not attached to an instance 

### IPv6
- A lot more addresses than ipv4
- All Ipv6 addresses are public

## What is a VPC?
- Private network to deploy your resources.
- It is linked to a specific region
- It has a **CIDR range** =>Range of IP addresses that is allowed in a VPC

### Subnet
- A subnet is a partion of the VPC where we can run services.
- It is associated with an availability zone.
- **Public Subnet** => subnet that can be accessed from the internet => You would put a Load Balancer, or an EC2 instance with dirrect internet connection.
- **Private subnet** => Not accessible from the internet => Good to put Databases,or anything that shouldn't have direct access to the internet.

### Route tables
Route tables are used to define access to the internet and between other subnets.

### Internet Gateway & NAT gateways
Internet gateways help our VPC instances connect to the internet. 
Public subnets have a route to the internet gateway

NAT gateways allow instances in private subnets to access the internet, while remaining private (for package updates for example)
The NAT Gateway will be added to the Public subnet, and the private subnet will connect to the NAT.

If we dettach the Internet Gateway from the VPC, then no subnet it it will have internet access.

### Network ACL and security groups

#### NACL (Network ACL)
- Firewall that controls traffic from and to a subnet.
- Can have ALLOW and DENY rules
- Are attached at the Subnet level
- Rules only include IP addresses.
- Return Traffic must me specifically allowed

#### Security groups
- A firewall that controls traffic to and from a ENI / EC2 instance.
- Can have only ALLOW rules
- ** They can reference IP addresses or other security groups.
- Return traffic is automatically allowed

For exam: NACL at the subnet level, SG at the EC2 instance level.