# IAM
IAM => Identify Access Management

- Root users: Only to set account

To interact with AWS we create Users. 

## Groups
Users can be grouped together.

For example: A `Developers` group and an `Operations` group in a company.

- A user can belong to multiple groups.
- We create groups because of permissions.
- Groups and Users can have attached permissions.

## Permissions
Users and groups can be assigned policies (Permissions). These are stored in a JSON document that describes the resource, effect, and action allowed.

In AWS you don't allow all users to do everything.
`Least privilege principle` => Don't give users more permissions than they need.

## Access
When we create a user we can:
- Give console access through a password
- Give it an Access Key to access through the CLI. Run `$ aws configure` to set up. The credentials get stored in `~/.aws/credentials`

When you log in with an IAM user the account dropdown will show `IAM user: user name`

## Tags
Information you can add to AWS resources

## Policies
Policies inheritance:
- If you assign users to a group, all the users will inherit the groups permissions policies.
- Inline Policy: For users that don't have a group.

Policy JSON structure:
Version: Policy language version
Statement []: 
    - Sid: Identifier of the statement (Optional)
    - Effect: Allow or Deny
    - Principal: Which account / user/ role this policy will be attached to.
Action: List of API calls that will be allowed or denied based on the effects
Resource: List of resources to which the action will apply to

We can attach policies to a user directly, or inherit them from a group.
We can also create custom policies that allow special combination of actions over different AWS resources.

## IAM MFA
To secure an AWS account we can do several things.

- Password policy.
In AWS IAM you can set a password policy (length, character tyoes), passwords expiry, password re-use,

- MFA (Multifactor authentication)
It is highly recommended (at least root account) to have Multi Factor Authentication

- Virtual MFA: (Google authenticcator, Authy)
- U2F security key => Hardware device for multi factor authenticaton (YubiKey)
- Hardware Key Fob MFA

## AWS access
- AWS Management Console => Protected by password and MFA
- AWS CLI => Protected by access keys
- AWS SDK => Protected by access keys. Embedded in application code.

The aws command is followed by the service (for example iam), and followed by the action.
`aws iam list-users`

To do actions with different users on the .aws/credentials file you have to use the --profile tag

`aws iam list-users --profile other-user`

## Cloud Shell
Alternative way to access AWS instead of the CLI. It's a shell interface in the aws browser console. This service is free to use but isn't available in all regions.

The perissions in cloud shell are applied to the user that is using it, and the region defaults to the specific user's region. You can override it with the `--region` flag.

Files that you create on your cloudshell environment will persist across sessions. You can also upload and download files from it.

## IAM Roles for AWS services
Aws services will have to perform actions on our behalf. For this, we assign roles to these IAM roles, which act as users, but are not intended to be used by real users.
For example, an EC2 instance might perform actions on AWS. For this we need to give this EC2 instance permissions, so that it can perform those actions. We can aassign an IAM role for this. For example, EC2 instance roles, Lambda Function roles, or Cloud Formation.

Roles allow entities in AWS to get credentials to do whatever they need to do.

We can create an AWS role for an AWS service, AWS account, Web identity, and others. The most common AWS services roles are EC2 and Lambda.

Once we create a role, we have to attach policies to it.

## IAM Security Tools
- IAM credentials report => List of all users and credentials
- IAM access advisor => services permissions granted and last access to a specific user

** Principle of Least Privilege ** => Give the minimum privileges so a user can perform a task

## IAM Best practices
- Use root account only to set up account
- Assign users to groups and permissions to group
- Create a strong password policy
- Use and enforce MFA
- Create and use Roles to give permissions to AWS services
- Use access keys for CLI and SDK
- Audit permissions with Credentials Report and Access Advisor
- Never share IAM users and access keys

## Shared responsability principle (Important for exam)
AWS: Infrastructure, global network security, Compliance validation
You:
- Users, groups, roles and policies and monitoring
- Enable MFA
- Rotate keys often
- Use IAM tools with appropiate permissions
- Analyze access patterns and permissions

In other words, AWS is responsible for the infrastructure and you are responsible for how you use the resources.
