# Elastic Compute Cloud

## EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud)
- Most popular AWS service
- Infratructure as a Service

Capabilities
- Renting virtual machines (EC2)
- Storing data on virtual drives (EBS)
- Distribute loads across machines (ELB Elastic Load Balancer)
- Scale services (ASG Auto-scaling group)

EC2 are virtual servers that we rent from aws

Characteristics of machine
- OS: Linux, Windows or MacOS
- Compute power: Cores / CPU units
- RAM
- Storage
    - Network attached EBS / EFS
    - Hardware attached (EC2 instance store)
- Network card: Speed of card, public IP address
- Firewall rules: Security groups
- Bootstrap script (configure at first launch): EC2 user data

## EC2 User Data
We can bootstrap our machine instance using EC2 User data scripts, run once on start.

- The script can install updates, software, download files from internet, etc, al when starting the instance.
- EC2 data scripts run with the root user `sudo`

## Virtual machine types
There's different types of Virtual machines with different capacities. For practicing use `t2.micro`, which should be free for a monthrunning continously on the free tier.


# Instances

## Configuration

### Network
When configuring an instance you can allow SSH, HTTP, and HTTPS access to it.

### Key pair
Create a key pair for SSH (Secure shell) access from anywhere (0.0.0.0)

### Advanced
On the `User Data` or `Info` textfield you can add custom scripts that run the first time (only) the EC2 instance is booted.    s

### Properties
AMI: EC2 instance operating system
Key pair: The key pair to access the EC2 instance via SSH

Id: The unique Id of an EC2 instance
Public Ipv4 address: Public IP address to access the instance from the internet. AWS will change the public IP address of an instance if you stop and restart it.
Private IPv4 address: Private IP address to access the EC2 instance internally from AWS (other services). AWS won't change the internal IP address when stopping and restarting.

Inbound rules: What ports of the instance are accessible from where (0.0.0.0 is everywhere)


### Stopping instances
If you stop an instance AWS will not bill you for it, so for testing purposes is better to have a stopped instance. Restarting the instance keeps the state because there's a volume attached to it (Storage).

## Instance types
There's different types of instances with different combinations of Compute, Memory, network bandwidth `https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/`

### Naming convention
For example: m5.2xLarge

m: instance class
5: generation (hardware generation)
2xLarge: Size within instance class

### Different instance types

- General purpose => Balanced resources, good for web servers, code repositories. Ex: t2.micro is a geenral purpose instance.
- Compute optimized => More compute intensive applications, batch processing, media transcoding, high-performance computing, servers, machine learning, dedicated gaming servers. Ex. C series ones C5, C6
- Memory optimized (RAM)=> Processing of large datasets. High performance relational / non-relational databases, distributed web cache stores, in-memory databases.  R series (Ram), as well as X1 series
- Storage optimized. For high frequency of online transaction processing, relational and non-sql databases, cache (Redis), Data warehouse, Distributed file systems.

## Security groups (Firewall) and classic ports view

- Security groups are the fundamental of security on AWS.
- They control what is allowed as inbound and outbound traffic to EC2 instance, load balancer.
- Security rules reference each other by IP addresses (other computers with access) or security groups

Ec2 instance => Attaches Security group / Firewall => Security group has rules

Security groups regulate 
- Access to ports
- Authorized IP ranges (Ipv4 or Ipv6)
- Controls inbound and outbound network.

- A security group can be attached to multiple instances or load balancer.
- They are locked into a region an VPC combination
- It's dettached from the EC2 instance, meaning if the security group blocks a request, the EC2 instance won't see it.
- If the application is not accessible (time out), then it's a security group issue. If the error is Connection Refused, then the Security group works fine and it's an EC2 error.
- Default: All inblud traffic blocked, all outbound traffic allowed.

* Advanced important feature
If two ec2 intances have attached the a same security group, they'll be able to communicate directly.

### Important for exam
Ports
22 => SSH (Secure Shell)
21 => FTP (File transfer protocol)
22 => SFTP (Secure File transfer protocol, via SSH)
80 => http (unsecured websites)
443 => https (secured websites)
3389 => RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) - log into a Windows instance

* Every time you se a Time Out (hanging) when connecting to an Ec2 instance, 100% of the time is a security group rule issue.

## SSH (Secure Shell into server)
ssh can be user on Mac, Linux and Windows > 10. Windows < 10 use Putty. They do the same thing, allow you to use the ssh protocol
Instance connect => Access the console from the browser.

Ssh allows you to connect to a remote server shell. To do this we need:
- .pem file with key pair
- Public Ip address of EC2 instance

Command to run:
 `ssh -i <my_pem_file> ec2-user@<public_ip_here>`

 Make sure the pem file has proper authorizations: `chmod 0400 <file_name>`

 We use ec2-user because the Amazon Linux AMI has a default user called ec2-user

 ## IAM roles for EC2 instances

To connect the EC2 instance to other Aws services, it is NOT recommended to run `aws configure` and store personal credentials in the `~/.aws/credentials` file, as any user with access to the instance could see them.

* Use IAM role!
To provide permissions to an EC2 instance, NEVER put IAM or root credential key pair inside an EC2 instance, use an IAM role.

### Attach IAM role to Ec2 instnace
On Ec2, go to Instances list, check the EC2 instance => select Action => Security => Modify IAM role.
Attach the wanted role.

## EC2 instances purhasing options

1. On demand
Pay for what you use, billed by second.
Highest cost but no up-front payment.
No long-term commitment

Recommended for short tem and uninterupted work load 

2. Reserved
72% discount compared to on-demand.
Reserve specific instance attribute??
Reservation period - 1 OR 3 years
Payment options => Upfront, partially upfront, no upfront

Recommended for steady-state usage applications => Database for example. Or, use for an application you plan on running on a server continuously for 1 year or 3 years

3. Savings plan

Discount based on long-term usage.
Commit to a certain usage
Excess use set at the on-demand price.
Locked to specific instance family and region (For example M5 on us-east-1)

4. Spot instances
90% discount. 
Define max price you want to pay. If you pass it you lose the instance.
Most cost efficient
Useful for workloads that are resilient to failure => Batch jobs, data analysis, image processing, distributed worloads, with a flexible start and finish time. ** Not suited for critical jobs or databases.**

Short workloads, cheap and lose instances (not reliable)

5. Dedicated host
Book entire physical service. Fully dedicated for your use.
For companies with string compliance requirements, and user server-bound software licenses.
Purchasing options
- On demand
- Reserve   

The most expensive option because you reserve a physical server.

6. Dedicated instance => No other user will share hardware.
Instances run n hardware dedicated to you, but is not a physical server.
May share hardware with instances on same account.
No control over instance placements.

Important: `Dedicated Instance` means you have your instance on your own hardware, `Dedicated Host` you get access to the physical server itself, giving you access to the lower level hardware.

7. Capacity reservations => Reserve capacity in specific AZ on any duration.
Suited for short-term, uniterruped workloads that need to be in a specific AZ.

### Resort analogy
On Demand: Stay at the resort whenever you like, full price.
Reserved: Planning ahead, stay a long time. You get discount.
Savings plan: Pay a certain amount per hour for certain period and stay in any kind of room (better or worse).
Spot instances: Last minute discount when a room is empty, people can bid for them. Thy can kick you out if someone bids higher.
Dedicated Host: Book the entire building of the resort.
Capacity reservation: Book a room for a period at fool price, wether you stay on it or not.

## EC2 shared responsability
Aws: Infrastructure, isolation on physical host, replacing faulty hardware.
User: 
- Security in the cloud (Access or not to the EC2 instance) Security Group rules
- OS maintenance and security patches.
- Maintain software and utilities installed
- IAM roles and IAM user access management
- Data security on your instance.

# EC2 instance storage

## EBS volumes (Elastic Block Store)

Elastic Block Store is a network drive you can attach to an instance while it runs. Analogy: A network (not physical) USB stick
- Allow instances to persist data
- Can only be mounted one instance at a time (at CPP level)
- Bound to specific availability zone

## EBS Volume
- It's a network drive: Uses a network to communicate with the instance (bit of latency)
- Can be detached and atached to different EC2 instances.
- It's locked to an availability zone (limits to what instances you can attach it) => Important
- You have to provision capacity in advance => Billed on that provision capacity
- An EBS volume can only be attached to one instance at a time, but an instance can have multiple EBS volumes
- You can create unattached EBS volumes

### Delete on Termination (attribute)
* Delete on termination attribute => When created as part of an EC2 instance, by default the EBS volume will be terminated. Ypu can disable `Delete on Termination` to avoid this.

To check this go to the instance => Storage tab => scroll right to the `Delete on Termination` column

## EBS Snapshots

- You can take a snapshot (backup) of an EBS Volume at any time. You can restore it from the backup.
- It's recommended to detach the Volume from the Instance before doing the snapshot
- With snapshots you can copy EBS Volumes across availability zones or Regions

### Copy EBS to another region steps
- Detach Volume 1 from Instance 1
- Make a Snapshot of Volume 1 => Volume1-backup
- On Instance 2, restore the EBS from the Volume1-backup => Volume 2
- Attach EBS volume 2 to Instance 2

### Features (Snapshot & Recycle bin)
- EBS snapshot archive => You can move it to an Archive Tier (75% cheaper). EBS Snapshot => EBS snapshot archive. Downside: It takes 42-72 hours to restore from the archive.
- Recycle bin => Optional recycle bin for deleted snapshots (kept for 1 day to 1 year, depending of retention rules). Useful to protect oneself from accidental deletion.

Actions (Snapshot)
- Create snapshot fom volume
- Recreate volume from snapshot

Snapshot backups are important if the EC2 instance is used as a persistence layer, for example a database.

### Recycle Bin
AWS service to protect Volume snapshots and IAM (Amazon machine images) from accidental deletion.

### Retention Rules
On the recycling bin service you can create retention rules for an accidental deletion. These include:
- Number of days of retention in recycling bin
- Lock / Unlock for the deletion of the retention rule.
- Recources: List of elements in recycling bin.

### Levels of persistance
Volume => Volume snapshot [or Volume Snapshot archive(cheaper)] => Recycle bin

### AWS backup
Service to automate the creation of snapshots for EBS volumes

### See free space for an attached volume
With type:
`df -hT <device>` For example: `df -hT /dev/xvda1`  => `/dev` is the directory for devices.

List all:
`df -h`

#### Storage on EBS volume
- Besides databases, an EBS volume can store server congiurations (Ngnix or Apache) for an EC2 instance, library files, code, temporary cache and files, 
- Having snapshots can be helpful to re-establish an EC2 instance on different zones in case of Zone failures on AWS

# AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
Definition: An AMI is a preconfigured package to launch an EC2 instance, including OS, software, and other settings.
You specify an AMI when you launch an instance.

Customization of a EC2 instance: You add your own software, OS, configuration, monitoring.
- Built for a specific region
- Launches EC2 instancce
- Commonly we use public AMI: Amazon Linux (provided by AWS)
- We can make our own AMI 
- we can get an AMI from AWS Marketplace AMI, made by others (Possibly selled)

## AMI Components
1) Root Volume template
 - OS (Ex. Amazon Linux)
 - Application Software (Ex. Apache Server)
2) Launch Permissions
3) Block Device Mapping (EBS mapping to volume)

## AMI process (From Ec2 instance)
- Start an EC2 instance and customize it
- Stop EC2 instance
- Build AMI (EBS snapshots)
- Launch instances from other AMIs

How to create AMI
- Right click instance from instance list to get a dropdown menu
- Images & Templates => Create Image

Now, you can launch instances and select your AMI on the `My AMI's` tab

# EC2 Image builder
Service on AWS (important for exam) that allows to:
Create, maintain, validate, and test EC2 AMIs

Ec2 Image Builder => Builder EC2 instance (creates EC2 instance and install custom software) => New AMI => Test EC2 instance (Run predefined tests) => AMI distributed

- It can run on a schedule
- Free service

# EC2 instance store
If we need more performance than a EBS network drive can provide, we can use an EC2 instance store, high-performance hardware disk attached to the server.

- Better I/O performance
- EC2 Instance store loses storage if Instance stopped => Can't be used as a durablelong-term storage or backup (ephemeral)
- Good use: Cache, temporary content.
- Risk of data loss if hardware fails
- User's responsability to back up the data in it.

# EFS (Elastic File System)
 - Managed NFS(network file system) Can be mounted to hundreds of EC2 instances, contrary to EBS that can only do one.
 - Works only on Linux EC2 instances
 - Works on multiple availability zones
 - Pretty expensive

 ## EBS vs EFS (Important for exam)
 - EBS attached to one instane in one availability zone
 - Different EC2 instances can mount the same EFS drive, and they'll all see the same files (Shared file system)

 ## EFS infrequent access (EFS-IA)
 - Storage class cost-optimized for files that are not accesed every day.
 - Up to 92% lower cost
 - EFS will automatically move your files to EFS-IA based on the last time these were accesed
- Cost optimization done on the background.

# Shared responsability EC2 storage

AWS:
- Infrastucture
- Replicate data for EBS volumes and EFS drives
- Replace faulty hardware
- Ensure AWS employees can't access data

User:
- Set up backups
- Set data encryption
- Responsability for data on the drives
- Understanding the risk of EC2 instance store (Data loss if hardware failure)

# FSx
3rd party file system on AWS

FSx for Lustre
High performance, scalable file storage for high-performance computing (HPC)
- Luster => Linux+Cluster
- Machine learning, analytics
- Hundreds of GB per second and sub ms latencies


FSx For Windows File Server
- Windows native file system
- Built on Windows File Server
- Support for SMB and NTFS protocols
- Integrated with Microsoft Active Directory

For the exam it's only important to remember the two flavors of FSx (Luste and Windows File Server)

