
- OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) Model divides Network into 7 functional layers

# Network Topologies

## Networking Concepts
- Network: Two or more computer systems linked by a transmission medium and sharing protocol that allws them to exchange data: 
- Nodes and Links
    - Intermediate nodes: forarding functions
    - End-system nodes: Send and receive data

### Client-server vs Peer-to-peer
- Client-server: Most devices are clients and server is a more powerfull device that provides resources (Ex. Business networks)
- Peer-to-peer: Each host acts as both client and server. Decentralized (Ex. Residential)

### Appliances, applications and functions
- Appliance: Computer with an OS or software designed to execute a particular network role. Switch, router, AP, Firwall, LB, proxies.
- It can be physical device or virtual software appliance
- Applications: Nodes deployed to provide services that allows network to do useful work.
- Functions: Networks can have different properties to perform functions like VPN or QoS

## Network Types
Netowrk type refers to size and scope of a network

### LAN
- Single geographical location
- All nodes connected with cables and short-range wireless tech
- Single organization: Residential, SOHO, Small and medium size enterprise (SME), Enterprise LAN, Datacenter.

### WAN
- Network of networs, connected by long-distanec links.
- Enterprise WAN: Connect main office with branches.
- Connect Datacenters to each other
- Likely use leased network devices and links, operated and managed by service provider.

## Network Topology
Topology defines physical or logical structure on network in terms of nodes and links

### Point-to-point (duplex)
- Two nodes connected to network media
- half duplex: Node can't send and receive at the same time
- Full duplex: Node can send and receive at the same time

### Star Topology
- Central node / concentrator (forwarding appliance like Switch or Router) where peripheral nodes connect to.
- Typical SOHO network
- Easy to configure and troubleshoot
- Conentrator is Single Point of failure
- Concentrator can forward messages to all nodes (Like a Hub) or selectively do it (like a Switch)
- Hub-and-spoke: Start topology used in WAN networks

### Mesh Topology
- Used in WANs
- Full-mesh: Each device has direct connection to all nodes. Impractical as it requires n*(n-1)/2 links, making it exponential.
- Partial mesh: Nodes can forward packets by learning network topology, avoiding links between all devices.
- Excelent redundancy, as multiple routes are available for a package.
