
# Networking Overview
- OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) Model divides Network into 7 functional layers

# 1. Network Topologies

## Networking Concepts
- Network: Two or more computer systems linked by a transmission medium and sharing protocol that allws them to exchange data: 
- Nodes and Links
    - Intermediate nodes: forarding functions
    - End-system nodes: Send and receive data

### Client-server vs Peer-to-peer
- Client-server: Most devices are clients and server is a more powerfull device that provides resources (Ex. Business networks)
- Peer-to-peer: Each host acts as both client and server. Decentralized (Ex. Residential)

### Appliances, applications and functions
- Appliance: Computer with an OS or software designed to execute a particular network role. Switch, router, AP, Firwall, LB, proxies.
- It can be physical device or virtual software appliance
- Applications: Nodes deployed to provide services that allows network to do useful work.
- Functions: Networks can have different properties to perform functions like VPN or QoS

## Network Types
Netowrk type refers to size and scope of a network

### LAN
- Single geographical location
- All nodes connected with cables and short-range wireless tech
- Single organization: Residential, SOHO, Small and medium size enterprise (SME), Enterprise LAN, Datacenter.

### WAN
- Network of networs, connected by long-distanec links.
- Enterprise WAN: Connect main office with branches.
- Connect Datacenters to each other
- Likely use leased network devices and links, operated and managed by service provider.

## Network Topology
Topology defines physical or logical structure on network in terms of nodes and links

### Point-to-point (duplex)
- Two nodes connected to network media
- half duplex: Node can't send and receive at the same time
- Full duplex: Node can send and receive at the same time

### Star Topology
- Central node / concentrator (forwarding appliance like Switch or Router) where peripheral nodes connect to.
- Typical SOHO network
- Easy to configure and troubleshoot
- Conentrator is Single Point of failure
- Concentrator can forward messages to all nodes (Like a Hub) or selectively do it (like a Switch)
- Hub-and-spoke: Start topology used in WAN networks

### Mesh Topology
- Used in WANs
- Full-mesh: Each device has direct connection to all nodes. Impractical as it requires n*(n-1)/2 links, making it exponential.
- Partial mesh: Nodes can forward packets by learning network topology, avoiding links between all devices.
- Excelent redundancy, as multiple routes are available for a package.

# 1.2 Open System Interconnection (OSI) model
- Created by ISO, to promote understanding of how components in a network work.
- Separates functions of hardware and software into discrete layers.
- Not a standard or a specification. Functional guideline for designing network protocols, software, appliances.

All People Seem To Need Data Processing
Application - Presentation - Session - Transport - Network - Data Link - Physical

## 1.22 Data Encapsulation and Decapsulation

Network protocol => set of rules to exchange info in structured form.
- Two main functions: 
    Addressing: Where package of info should go
    Encapsulation: How messages should be packaged for transmition. Like the envelope of a message. 
- Same-layer interaction: Nodes communicating on a same OSI level with the same protocol.
- Adjacent-layer interaction: To communicate between layers, each layer provides services for the layer above, and uses services from layer below.
- Encapsulation: Sending node as a `header` to the data payload, forming a chunk of data called PDU (Protocol Data Unit) 
- Decapsulation: From Physical layer up. Extract Ethernet fram, then extracts IP address, all the way up to HTTP.
- Real world protocols don't conform exactly to OSI model.

## 1.23 Layer 1 - Physical
- Transmision of physical bits of data, cabled or wireless.
- Physical layer specifies:
    1. Physical topology. Layout of nodes. Area of larger network is called a Segment, were all nodes have access to same media.
    2. Physical interface: Mechaical specifications of cable (construction / pins) or specification of antenna and radio receiver (wireless).
    3. Signaling: Process of sending and receiving encoded data over the medium.

### Devices:
    - Tranceiver
    - Repeater
    - Hub
    - Media converter

## 1.24 Layer 2 - Data Link (Frame)
- Transfer of data between nodes in the same Segment, via hardware addresses (MAC)
- LANs usually don't connect directly in Mesh toology, but via a central node like a Switch or WAP that provides forwarding function.
- Organizes stream of bits into structured units calles `frames`. Each frame contains Network layer package and payload.
    - Includes source and destination hardware
- Assigns Destination hardware addres, source hardware addres, and checksum of basic error checking, to ensure integrity of frame.

### Devices
- Network Adapter Card (NIC)
- Bridge - Intermediate system that joins Physical network segment
- Switch: Advanced bridge with many ports. Efficient links between large humber of nodes.
- Wireless Access Point (AP): Allows bridges between wireless and wired networks.

## 1.25 Layer 3 - Network (Datagram)
- Move data on network of networks (internetwork) by using logical networks and host ids.
- Main appliance: Router.
- Each package has a destination network address
- Package is forwareded router to router (hop by hop)
- Firewalls operate at this layer to enforce ACL (Access Control List)

## 1.26 Layer 4 - Transport (Segment)
- End-to-end or host-to-host layer
- Identifies each type of network application by assigning port number
- At Transport layer, data from upper layers, series of PDUs or segments, tagged with application's port number.
- Port are invisible in Network and Data Link layers. Receiving host depasulates package and identifies it by its port number => Passed to relevant handler on application layer.

### Devices
- Multilayer switches (load balancers)
- Security appliances
- Advanced firewalls and instrusion detection systems (IDDs)

## 1.27 Upper Layers
- Associated to distinct real-world protocols. Interfaces between applications and the Transport layer.
- Upper layer services provide most of the services that make a network useful (web browsing, email, communication, directory, DB services)

### Layer 5 - Session
- Sequence of exchange messages that create a session or dialog, maintain it and close it.

### Layer 6 - Presentation
- Transforms data between the format required by the network and the format required by the application.
- Character conversion (ASCII and unicode)
- Data compression and encryption

### Layer 7 - Application
- Application protocols provide an interface for software programs and software hosts to have established communication channel.44

## 1.3 SOHO Networks

### 1.3.1 SOHO Routers
LANs can be big or small networks (home or enterprise). SOHO is category of LAN with small number of hosts with single integrated appliance.
SOHO router is intermediary between LAN and WAN. Routing is just one function.

### Physical layer function
- RJ45s to connect to LAN
- Antenna to send and receive wireless signals
- RJ45 / Coax / DSL for WAN connection to ISP

### Data Layer functions
- Switch: RJ45 connectors are connected internally with a Switch
- Access point internall wired to a Switch port
- Host interfaces identified by MAC address

### Network Layer Functions
- Router makes forwarding decisions between LAN and public internet
- Zones distinguished by IP addresses
- Router runs DHCP server to provide unique address to all connected hosts
- SOHO router WAN is allocated a public IP address by the ISP

### Transport / Application / Security
- At layer 4 (Transport) each application is identified by a port number
- No layer for security, security issues can occur in each layer
- Router's management interface protected by a password

### The Internet
- SOHO Router -> Costumer Premise Equipment (CPE) - leased by ISP or owned by client.
- Demarcation Point (demarc) - where the ISPs cabling enters the customer's premise

#### ISPs
- Internet Exchange Points IXPs are connected with high-bandwidth trunks
- ISPs use transit peering arrangements to carry traffic to and from parts of the internet they don't physically own

#### Internet Stadards
- Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANNA)-> Manages allocation of IPs to regional registries that then allocate them to local registries or ISPs
- Internet Engineering Taskforce (IETF) -> Solutions to Internet problems and adoption of new standards published as Request for Comments (RFCs)
    - New RFCs are createded, old ones never modified. (RFC not required exam)

### Binary and Hexadecimal

Base 10 - Decimal
Base 2 - Binary
- An 8-bit value is called a byte or octet
- Ipv4 address Can be represented in 4 decimal octets. For example: 203.0.110.1 

Base 16 - Hexadecimal
- Used in MAC addresses
- Values from 0-9 and letters A-F
- digit3*16^2 + digit2*16^1 + digit1*16^0
- Examples: 
    255 (dec) = FF (hex) = (15x16^1) + (15*16^0)
    17 (dec) = 11 (hex) = => (1*16^1) + (1*16^0)
    34 (dec) = 22 (hex) = (22*16^1) + (2*16^0)
    187 (dec) = (hex) = (11*16^1) + (11*16^0)
