Networks are not made by connecting each device to others via cables, intermediary devices are used to establish local networks: Hubs, Bridges, and Switches.

## 3.1 Network Interfaces

Network Interface: Means by which node is connected to media and exchanges data with other network hosts.

## 3.1.1 Network Interface Cards
Network Interface Controller (NIC) / Network Adapter: Transceiver component that physically connects host to transmission medium.
    - Most support Gigabit ethernet
    - 10GbE and 40GBe at a price premium
    - Can provision multiple ports in same card 
    - Each device has a unique MAC (Media Access Control) address, or EUI (Extended Unique Identifier) or EA (Ethernet Address), 
    also referred as unique physical address.

## 3.1.2 Modular Transceiver
Different modules have different connectors. Connectors establish connection at Physical layer.

### SFP/SFP+
- LC connector and supports Gigabit Ethernet
- Enhanced SFP (SFP+) supports 10GbE with LC form-factor.

### QSFP / QSFP+
- Quad small form factor pluggable form factor that supports 4x1 GBps
- Enhances QSFP (QSFP+) supports 40GbE for 4x10. Typically used with parallel fiber and multi-fiber push-on (MPO)
    - Can also be used with Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) Ethernet Standard.

### Transceiver mismatch issues ???
- Modular transceiver designed for specific type of optical fiber. Mismatches can generate significant signal loss.
    1. Single mode fiber: Laser diodes
    2. Multi mode fiber: LED or different type of laser (VCSEL)

3 ways of deploying fiber - beside fiber mode:
- Duplex: Two strands transmit (Tx) and receive (Rx)
- Parallel multiple strands - 8 or 20 to implement Tx and Rx
- Wavelength Division Multiplex uses single bidirectional or dual unidirectional to implement multiple channels.

### 3.1.4 Transceiver signal strength issues ??

- Microscopic imperfection in structure of glass fiber will provoke some signal loss in fiber optics (not as much as copper)
- Optical Link Budget / loss budget => Amount of loss suffered by all components on fiber transmission path:
    - Attenuation: Loss over length of cable
    - Connectors
    - Splices
- Loss budget must be less than the power budget
- Power budget: Calculated from Transceiver Tx power and receiver sensitivity
- **Margin**: Difference between power and loss budget. Safety factor to account for suboptimal installation conditions.
- Low margin: Installation less likely to achieve expected bandwidth


### 3.1.5 Ethernet Frame Format
- Ethernet encapsulates payload from higher layer protocols in protocol data unit (PDU) called `Frame`
- Header fields in Ethernet frame: `Preamble - SFD - Destination MAC - Source MAC - Ether Type - Payload FCS`

#### Preamble:
Preamble and SFD (Start frame delimiter) used for clock sync.
- 8 bytes of alternate 1s and 0s
- SFD: two consecutive 1s at the end

#### EtherType
- Specifies type of protocol. IPv4 `0x0800`, IPv6 `0x86DD`

#### Error checking
- Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) - 32 bit (4 byte) checksum
- Calculated based on content of frames
- Receiving node performs same calculation and accepts if they match

### Media Access Control Address Format
- 48-bit Media Access Control (MAC) identifiers
- Used as source and destination address in a frame
- Burned-in address => IEEE gives manufacturers a range of numbers to assign to their unique products.
- Local Administered address: 
    - An org can use its own addresses, but it adds overhead and becomes their responsability to assign unique MAC to devices
    - It's done by changing the Universal/local bit from 0 to 1.

#### Broadcast address:
- I/G bit of MAC determines if frame destination is a single node (0) for unicast or a group (1) for broadcast/multicast transmission
- When broadcast, the frame should be processed by all nodes receiving it.

## 3.2 Ethernet Switches

Networks use intermediary systems to reduce cabling costs and complexity.

### 3.2.1 Hubs / Repeaters
- Centralized connection for nodes in network in early days of Ethernet
- Multiport repeater: Every port receives transmission from every other port, unicast or broadcast => Hosts programmed to ignore transmissions not addressed to them. "Sniffing" was a big security issue.
- Works at the Physical layer (1), only sends electrical signals.
- Every port on the same collision domain
- Half duplex, media bandwith (10-100 Mpbs) shared by nodes.
- No configuration
- Connecting hubs to each other on a network generated a lot of unnecessary traffic, for that a `Bridge` was used

### 3.2.2 Bridges
- Connects network segments together, insulating electrical signals between hubs => Prevents unnecessary messages propagating between hubs.
- Blocks or lets through messages depending on destination device. 
- It has a Forwarding Database that gets populated gradually as communication happens. DB gets flushed after a period to ensure current information.
- Layer 2 devices => Makes decisions based on MAC address
- Separates collision domains
- If no record of mac addres, or frame ins broadcast/multicast, bridge floods frame to all segments, acting like a hub.

### 3.2.3 Switches
- Switch is a multi-port bridge. Each switch port is its own segment
- Creates forwarding database like a bridge. When DB empty it forwards to all connected devices, when populated it only forwards to the specific device.
- Best if one device by port. Each port separate collision domain. Full-duplex (send and receive simultaneously) connection between two nodes (microsegmentation)
- Unicast communication: Destination and Source MAC addresses
- Broadcast address: Frame to be sent to all device `FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF`. when a frame receives a broadcast frame, Switch acts like a Hub.
- Gigabit and higher can only be deployed with Switches
- Collisions can occur only if the port is operating in half-duplex mode (Only if legacy network card or hub attached to it)
- Traffic on each port in the same collision domain, unless Switch configured as Virtual LAN (VLAN)

### 3.2.4 Ethernet Switch types

- Market dominated by CISCO, but also HP, Huawei, D-Link, etc.
Categories:
    - Unmanaged vs managed. Managed most likely in corporate environment.
    - Stackable: Connected together to operate as a group (single unit)
    - Modular vs fixed: Modular switch has plug-in cards.
    - Desktop vs rack-mounted

### 3.2.5 Switch Interface Configuration
- Configuration of switch ports via CLI. SSH has to be enabled in the Switch's web interface.
- Switch OS have multiple command modes or hierarchies. EX. CISCO IOS modes:
    - User EXEC mode: read-only to run troubleshooting tools `>` prompt
    - Privileged EXEC mode: System status, backup and restore, `#` prompt
    - Global Configuration mode: For configuration updted `(config)#` prompt
- Interfaces identified by type, slot, port number. For example G0/2: Port 2 on the first 10/100/1000 slot (only slot)
- Stackable switches precede with module ID G3/0/2 : Port #2 on first slot of third module on the stack.
- TAB key works for auto-completion
- Ports autonegotiate speed (10/100/1000) and full/half duplex operation, unless manually configured.

- Switch subcommands:
    - shutdown
    - `speed` and `duplex`
    `switchport`: `switchport` mode access, `switchport port-security`

### 3.2.6 Switch Interface Configuration
CISCO CLI and 
PuTTy -> Terminal emulation program that allows us to SSH into the CISCO device

Purpose: Configure Serial Line: Speed and Bits

- When SSH to the Switch you get `>` User mode. Not much can be done here besides troubleshooting.
- Do `enable` to change to Privileged EXEC mode and the prompt changes to `#`. Not an Admin, like a regular guest account in a computer: Show, reload router.
- `conf t` = Global Configuration mode, full control. Change host name, interface commands, configs, setup routes and protocols. `(config)#`
    - `int` Interface access `(config-if)#` configuring individual interface.
    - `exit` to go back a mode or `control`+`c` to go back to the User mode.

- Running config => Configuration of the device running on RAM. To keep it you must save it to a Startup Config file`
    How to get there: 
        1. `>` `enable`
        2. `#` `show startup-config` // show existing startup config
        3. `#` `copy run start` // Copies running config to startup config file

