# PC
When the LEDs are lighted with no blinking it means there's an error

All data storage and transfer units transfer binary data.

# Blanking plates
These are necessary to prevent gaps. Gaps can lead to:
- Dust accumulating => More danger of overheating
- Make components exposed to touching and Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) that damages the components.
- Components more exposed to Electromagnetic interferance.

## Cables

- Peripheral cables have assymetric shapes (or form factor) to prevent wrong insertions.

### Universal Serial us cables (USB)

USB is managed by a host controller, that can hold multiple ports attached to the same bus. There can be 127 devices connected to a single controller, but to avoid sharing bandwidth, motherboards provide multiple USB controllers that each have 3 or 4 ports.

USB 1, 2, 3, and 4 are distinguished by their speed. Each have corresponding connector types that might look similar.

#### USB 2.0
- Up to 420 MBps
type A: Classic rectangle USB connector (Black in the inside)
type B (square printer type)
type B mini: (Cameras, my old blue harddrive)
Type B micro (Cellphone - old android)

#### USB 3.0 and 3.1
USB 3 has two sub-controllers, one handles SS (Superspeed devices) and the other legacy (1.1 and 2.0) devices. As a consequence, legacy devices don't slow down SuperSpeed devices.

USB 3 has confusuing naming conventions
USB 3.0, USB 3.1 (Gen 1), USB 3.2 (Gen 1) => 5 GB/s
USB 3.1 (Gen 2), USB 3.2 (Gen 2) => 10GB/s

USB 3.2 Gen 2x2 => Only USB-C typeconnector, up to 20GB/s

Type A: Same shape as type A and compatible (They have a blue connector inside to distinguish it, or are marked with `SS` for SuperSpeed)
Type B: Square but larger than the classic printer type cable, not physically compatible with previos type B
Type B micro: large and thin (My LaCie drive), not physically compatible with previous type B micro.
Type C: USC-C can handle video and laptop charging. Reversible

Lightning cable => USB too

#### USB 4
Only with USB-C connectors, don't confuse it with Thunderbolt 4. USB4 is based on Thurnderbolt 3.
Minimum 20GB/s, Max 40MB/s, handles video.

#### Thunderbolt
Standard created by Intel and Apple for transfering data, mostly in Macs. 
Min and Max: 40GB/s, handles video.

Since Thunderbolt 3, it uses a USB-C connector, Previously it had the same ad MiniDP connectors.

Thunderbolt connectors have a spark to differentiate them from standard USB-C connectors
Thurnderbolt 4 is USB4 with extra features (Spark with a 4 underneath)

### Video

- Video cable bandwidth determined by 
a) resolution of the image (3840 x 2160 px - 4k)
b) Frames per second or HZ

FPS usually describes de video source, while HZ the Rate of Display of the monitor. To avoid artifacts they should be the same or divisible by each other.

LCD => Liquid Crystal Display.

Video cables

- Vga
- High Definiition Multimedia (HDMI)
- Display Port (DP)b compatible.

#### HDMI
Supports video and audio. It requires a royalty for its use

#### DP
Doesn't require a royalty. Another of it's advantages is it supports to support multiple monitors with daisy-chaining with the same video source. Using multiple HDMI monitors requires multiple video cards.

#### Thurnderbolt

- Lightning and thunderbolt cables are used mainly in macs, but also in PCs
- Can be used as an interface to USB, HDMI and DP (video enabled)

### SATA Hard drive cables
- Serial Advancement Technoogy (SATA) => It has two cables, a power (15 pins - 5 cables) and a data cable (7 pins) => Most used today
- Molex Power connector => Outdated (4 pin)
- External SATA => Must use an eSATA cable. Not common, external drive market is dominated by USB.

## Motherboards

All processing and storage devices (mass storage, RAM, Cache, SCPI are connected through bus interfaces on the motherboard)
The motherboard's clock syncs the operation of all the parts of a PC.
Motherboards support a range of CPUs, usually manufactured by Intel or AMD.


### Electrical safety
- Always disconnect PC when working with it.
- Hold power button for a few secs to ensure internal components are drained of charge.
- Don't try to fix power supply

#### Electrostatic Discharge (ED)
Components are vulnerable to electrostatic discharge.
- USe an anti-ESD wrist wrap

### CPU sockets
A motherboard model will only support a limited number of CPUs. CPU socket has a square shape. When installed, CPU is covered by thermal paste, heat sink and fan.

### System memory slots
- Used to add RAM, temporary memory for the execution of programs, in-data use, and system kernell
- DIMM Dual Inline memory moue slots.

## Adapter connectors

Plug-in adapter cards inserted into expansion slots in the motherboard allow to extend the capabilities of a computer.
Two types of expansion slot interface
1. PCIe (Peripheral Component Interconnect Express Interface)

- point-to-point Serial communication. Each point-to-point connection is a link. 
    - Transfer rates measured in GT/s (gigatransfers per second)
- Each PCIe adapter supports a specific number of lanes x1, x4, x8, x16
    A card can go in a port with equal or greater number of lanes (Ex. x8 card will fit x8 and x16 slots) => Up-Pluging
- A phisically larger slot might support less number of lanes. Check the label on the motherboard.
 -PCIe versions are backwards compatible

2. PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect Interface)
- Legacy type bus
- Parallel communication.
- 32 bits
- Earliest 5v, latest 3.3v with different keying to avoid messing it up
- Slot not compatible with PCIe, though some motherboards support both.
- Software compatible with PCIe, if port available to support legacy adapter cards

## Modern connectors
- Usually reversible
- They use edge contacts instead of internal connection points.
- Sometimes use keying
+
## Motherboard form factors

ATX: Standard Form factor (size) for motherboards and cases (12 x 9.6 in) and up to 7 expansion slots.
Micro-ATX: Square 9.6 x 9.6 in size. Can be fit into ATX cases.
Mini-ATX: Square 6.7 x 6.7 in.

mini/nano/pico/mobile-ATX: Used in other devices and embedded systems.

### Motherboard installation
The motherboard is attached to the case using standoffs.

- Remove caps and align I/O board of motherboard with holes.
- Insert standoffs and 
- Don't add standoffs where there's no holes to support it.
- Secure with screws, don't overtight them
- Connect devices to the motherboard.

### Motherboard headers and power connectors
Components on the front and rear panels connecto to Headers on the motherboard
- Power button
- Drive (HDD) activity lights
- Audio ports
- USB ports: USB 2.0 => 9 pin connectors 
- USB 3.0 => 2x10 format cabled to two ports

#### Power connectos
- Power connector 2-pin x 12 pin block.
- Fan connectors 3 or 4 pin Molex KK format

### Video cards and capture cards
An expanssion card connected to PCIe or PCI can enhance the functionality of a computer in graphics, audio, capture and network.

Graphics Cards are distinguished by the following features:
- Graphics processing unit (GPU)
- Graphics Memory - Dedicated memory to process graphics. Built-in graphic modules might use RAM for this.
- Video ports - HDMI, DP, and Thunderbolt.

#### Capture cards
- Used to capture / record video and save it as a video or straming file.
- Connected internally via PCIe or externally with USB / Thunderbolt

### Sound cards

- Audio hardware built-in to the computer is suceptible to noise from internal components. Professional audio cards are external and connect via USB or Thunderbolt.

### Network interface cards
PCs have a built in Ethernet network card but a network interface card (NIC), with multiple Ethernet ports (RJ-45), can be used to connect different hosts to a network.

## Legacy cables

### DVI
Supports Analog and Digital signals

### VGA - Video Graphics Array
- Only analog signal
- 15 pin connector

### SCSI
- Legacy parallel connection
- SCSI (Small Computer System Interface)
- 68-pin coonector
- Commonly used to connect Hard Disks, external storage, CD/DVD drives
- Each device on Wide SCSI a unique ID 0-15

Modern buses like USB and Thunderbolt use serial communication. Back in the day serial communication was much slower, so parallel data transmission was used to support better data transfer rates.

### Integrated Drive Electronic Interface (IDE)
- The main mass storage interface for many years.
- 16 bit parallel transfer (Gray flat cable to connect devices with thre color-coded connectors)
(Gray flat cable to connect devices with thre color-coded connectors. Pin 1 is red)
- Motherboard conncetor => Blue, Device 0 => Black, Device 1 => Gray
- Gray flat cable for internal comm (EIDE cable)
The SCSI connector was a 68 pin connector used for parallel bus data transfers. => It is used typically to connect storage devices. 
- Each device connected has to be configured with a unique ID from 0-15

### EIDE (e-IDE)
Extended IDE 

### Serial cables

- COM port (RS-232 connector) port is serial port uses less sophisticated signaling methods than USB. 9 pin connector that transfered one bit at a time (serial), used mainly to connect external modems.
- USB is also a serial connector but much faster.

# Prof Messer

## Motherboard Storage connectors

### SATA (Serial Advanced Attachment Interface)
- Several SATA ports in motherboard. SATA data cable 7-pins
- For external disk or optical / tape drives
- Power supply via SATA power (15-pins) or Molex (4-pin)

### M.2
- Interface for internal SSD
- Port oriented horzontally
- Adapters of different sizes (42mm, 60mm, 80mm, 110mm)
- Power over bus, no cables needed

### eSATA (External SATA)
- For attaching external drives
- Must use external SATA cable
- Drawback: Power not supplied over the cable.