# Configure Windows

Operating System (OS)
- UI for hardware and environment to run applications.
- It has Kernel files and device drivers to interact with hardware and programs to provide UI and configuration tools

# Windows User settings

### Windows 10 Desktop

- Provides interface (shell) for configurations of software and hardware
- Top level UI => Desktop: START menu interface, Instant Search Box, Task View button, Notification area

### Windows 11 Desktop
- Center aligned touchbar and more space
- Multiple Desktops for different use cases

## Windows settings and control panel
- Settings app and control panel => Two interfaces for Windows administration
- Windows configuration data stored on database called `Registry`
- Windows Settings contains graphical applets to modify configurations

### Settings
Graphical icons hold pages for different configuration options. Windows 11's settings are reached on the navigation Menu

### Control Panel
- Legacy Control Panel has some extra configuration options not available on the newer Settings
- Every applet (icon) in Configration Panel represents a configuration task. It can belong to the OS or to applications.

## Account Settings
- User Account => Authenticated access to the computer with rights and priviledges. 
- Accounts can get permissions on files, folders, and printers
- Each account has a Profile => Default folders for personal data
- First user is the Administrator Account, Standard users only have access to their profile.

### Account Settings (interface)
- Local-only account can access only one computer
- Microsoft account can access multiple computers and Microsoft's cloud services.
- Your Info, email & accounts, sign-in options, access work or school, Family and other users, Sync settings.

### User Accounts Control Panel Applet (legacy)
- Provides options to adjust account name and changing account privileges
- It can change the User Account Control (UAC) settings => to prevent unauthorized use of admin privileges.

## Privacy Settings
Determines:
- What Data Windows is able to collect for telemetry
- App permissions to access devices, location, contacts, calendar, emails and files.

## Desktop Settings
- Local setting and appereance

### Time and Language
- Timezone to keep PC syncronized
- Region for keyboard, locatization, speech recognition. Multiple languages can be enabled.

### Personalization settings
- Custom themes: Wallpaper, screen saver, font, properties of Start Menu.

## Ease of access settings (Accessibility)
Input and Output configurations to fit each user's needs

- Vision: Cursor, sceen contrast, magnifier, narrator tool (optional)
- Hearing: Volume, mono mixing, closed-captioning, visual notifications
- Interaction: Keyboard and mouse usability. Speech and eye control features.

## File explorer
- File explorer / Explorer app allows to search, copy, move, delete, create files

### System Objects
- Mediate access to data files (On left navigation panel). 
- Representation of logical storage areas.
- Example: User Account, OneDrive, This PC, Network (computers, shared folders, shared printers), Recycle Bin

### Drives and Folders
- Data files are written to Disk drives
- Drives are referred by letters: A, B, C, D
- They can be physical disk or partition, network folder or removable disk.
- Each drive has a `root directory`, represented by a `\`, for example: `C:\`

### System Files
- System files are files required by OS to function
- Root directory contains following Folders to separate System and User files:
    - `Windows` => System root with drivers, logs, fonts, and system configuration files(System32)
    - `Program Files\Program Files (x86)`=> Subdirectory for installed application software
    - `Users`=> Users profile settings and data. Contains `NTUSER.DAT` registry data, and subfolder with personal files, data, and hidden folders for application settings and cusstomizations.

## File explorer and Indexing options

### File Explorer General tab
- You can set how to view the folders, and how to access them (single or double click)

### View Tab
- Hide extensions => File extensions usually hidden to avoid changing them, as applications need to know if they can open them.
- Hidden files and folders => Files can be tagged as hidden. Can be revealed by "Show hidden files and folders"
- Hide protected OS files => Hidden by default. `File/Resource protection` prevents users and admins from deleting this files.

### Indexing options
On Search Tab or File Explorer Options dialog, or Indexing Options applet.
- Define indexed locations and rebuild the index.
- It can include folders and email data stores
- * Corrupted index is common cause of search problems

# Configure Windows System Settings

## System Settings
System Settings page on Setting app => Configure Input/Output devices, power, remote desktop, notifications, clipboard.
About page => Hardware and OS information

### Advanced Settings
- Performance options => 
     - Desktop visual effects, virtual memory (paging), operation mode. 
     - Favor performance of background or foreground processes
     - * Desktop PC should always be optimized for forground processes
- Startup and recovery options, env variables (paths), user profiles

In legacy systems System Applet would manage advanced settings.

## Update and Security Settings

- Patch management => Updates to improve reliability, security, or performance
- Security Apps => Apps to detect and block threats to computer system and data (Ex. Crowdstrike)

### Windows Update
- Configure update detection and install via Settings > Update & Security
- Windows Update can be paused temporarily, not completely disabled.
- Windows Event Viewer records update activity

### Windows Security
Page with shortcuts to management pages of built-in Windows Defender and virus/threat protection and firewall.

### Activation
- Anti-piracy technology
- System must be activated after a certain number of days with a license

## Device Settings

- Windows works with plug-n-play => OS recognizes device, find and installs corresponding driver
- Sometimes you will have to install it manually before pluging in the device
- Drivers must be for either 32 or 64 bits

### Device Settings Page
- Display and sound device
- Peripherals
- Print / Scan (Devices and Printers)
- Phone => Associate smartphone to Windows
- Device Manager => system and peripheral devices

## Display and Sound Settings
Display => Size, color (callibrate for graphic design), Multiple Displays, Resolution and refresh rate (Windows should detect natve resolution of TFT and OLED displays).
Sound => Input / output, test volume

## Power options
- Reduce or turn-off power for connected devices
- Power-saving mode automatically can be configured
- Power Plan can be configured => Allows users to change between different states of preconfigured options that control CPU states, search/indexing, brightness, etc.
- USB selective suspend => Option to power-off peripheral devices.

### ACPI - Advanced Configuration and Power Interface specification
Specification that ensures hardware and software compatibility with different power modes. Example of ACPI modes:
- S0 => Powered on
- S5 => Soft powered off
- G3 => Mechanically powered off.

- Standby / Suspended to RAM (S1-S3): Cuts power to devices except RAM.
- Hibernate / Suspended to Disk (S4): Saves unsaved data to an hybernation file to disk in root boot volume, and turns computer off.

In Windows these power saving modes are implemented as Sleep, Hybrid Sleep, and Modern Standby:

Laptop: Normal Power-Saving mode is Standby. If running on battery it switches to Hybernate before sutthing down.
Desktop: Creates hybernation file and then goes to Standby state (Hybrid sleep mode). Can be configured to full hybernation mode after a period of time.
Modern Standby: function on low-powered S0 idle mode to maintain network connectivity

Sleep timers can be applied to individual component.

### Power and Sleep settings
Timers to set the device asleep when no activity detected.

### Power Button Settings
- Defines power button behavior
- Enable or disable `Fast Startup` => Use of Hybernation file to restore RAM and make computer ready before traditional shutdown option.

## Apps, programs, and features
- Windows Features: OS components that can be enabled or disabled, like a Hyper-V virtualization platform.
- Store apps: Apps installed from the store that run on a Sandbox, to prevent them from making system wide changes and crashing the OS. No admin privileges required.
- User-context applications: Installed in AppData folder, no admin privileges as they don't install in System or Program File folders.
- Desktop Apps: Require admin privileges.
- Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL): Run linux distros and applications.

## App settings
- App to configure Windows Features, add and remove apps, and which apps handle certain kind of files.
- Uninstall: Close app and antivirus before uninstalling.

### Programs and Features
Legacy software management interface.

### Mail
Applet added if Outlook is installed on the PC. Add email accounts, manage .OST and .PST files to cache and archive messages.

### Gaming
- Toggles Game mode on/off
- Game Mode: Suspends Windows Update and dedicated resources to support 3D performance for game instead of background services.

## Network settings

- Windows supports various forms of Network adapters: Ethernet, WiFi, cellular radio, and VPN.
- Each network must be assigned a trust profile: public, private, or domain.
- Network profile determines Firewall settings => Public network is more restrictive than private.

Network adapter and sttings configures in various applets:

- Network & Internet: Network status, change IP address of each adapter.
- Network Connections (ncpa.clp): Manages adapter devices, IP address info.
- Network and Sharing center: Status information
- Advanced Sharing settings: Configures network discovery, enables file and printer sharing.

### Windows Defender Firewall
- Host based filtering of network connections
- Can be enabled or disabled.
- Advanced Security => Complex Firewall rules.

### Internet Options
- Configuration setting for Explorer browser
- Security tab => restrict content

## Administrative tools
- Folder in Control Panel containing default Microsoft management console to configure local system

### Microsoft Management Console (MMC):
One or more snap-ins to modify advanced settings

- Computer Management: Schedule tasks and configure users, groups, services, devices.
- Defragment and Optimize drives: Maintainance of disk and file storage optimization
- Disk Cleanup: Delete unwanted files
- Event Viewer: System, security and application logs
- Local Security Policy: View and edit security settings
- Resource Monitor and Performance Monitor: Performance statistics
- Registry Editor: Manual edits of DB of Windows Configuration Settings
- Service console: Start/Stop processes running in the background
- Task Scheduler: Run scheduled tasks or scripts

## Management Shortcuts

- Windows + X => Shortcut menu with links to management utilities (Device management, Computer management, Command prompt, Windows Power Shell)
- Windows + search type => instant search of apps and utilities
- Windows + R => Execute programs with switches, Windows interface to execute commands.
