# Identifying OS types and Features

## Windows and Mac OS

4 Mainstream types of OS:
- Business client: Os designed to be client on business network
- Network Operating System (NOS): OS designed to run servers
- Home: Standalone desktop or workgroup in small office
- Cell Phone / Tablet

### Microsoft Windows
- Covers all market segments
- Windows 10 & 11 designed for business workstation and home use.
- Windows Server 2019 & 2022 designed for NOS. Same underlying code and GUI

### Apple Mac OS
 - Developed from UNIX, only runs on Apple devices
 - Limits versions of OS that can be installed in a computer

## Unix, Linux and ChromeOS
Third family of *nix OS

### Unix
- Trademark for family of OSs developed by Bell Laboratories
- Kernell / Shell architecture
- Portable to a range array of hardware platforms, unlike Windows and MacOS

### Linux
- Developed first by Linus Torvald
- Open Source OS kernel derived from Unix
- Bundled with shell, GUI, and app packages
- Many different Linux distributions (distros): Ubuntu, Debian, Mint, Fedora, Arch
- Can be used as Desktop and Server
    - Apache, IBM, and Sun/Oracle produce server applications for Linux
    - Desktop OS used in universities and schools, not businesses or homes
- Widely used for IoT devices

One of two release models:
1. Standard release model.
- Versions to distinguish between udpdates
- Some versions designed as LTS (Long Term Support)

2. Rolling release Model
- Updates delivered once the distro owner considers them stable
- No version distinctiion

### Chrome OS
- Derived from Linnux via open source OS Chromium
- ChromeOS is proprietary and designed to run on specific laptop (Chromebook) and PC (Chromebox). 
- Designed for budget and education markets
- Developed to use web apps => No need for powerful device
- Also Packaged apps available for offline use. ChromeOS can run apps designed for Android

## IOS and Android

### Apple IOS
- Proprietary code derived from Unix for iPhone
- New versions released once a year aprox
- Devices support limited amount of releases

### Apple Ipad OS
- Advantage: Better support for multitasking (More than one app at once)
- Some models have apple stylus support
- Versions released in parallel with iOS

### AndroidTM
- Developed by OpenHandset Alliance (mostly Google)
- Open source based on Linux
- More scope and hardware vendors
- Specific versions of the OS for different devices => Device compatibility more mixed
- Update restrictions determined by hardware vendor more than an Android authority

## Windows File System Types
Format process creates a file system on a Disk partition. Each OS is associated to types of file systems

### NTFS - New Technology File System
- File system by Microsoft to use with Windows
- 64-bit addressing scheme => Very large volumes and file sizes
- Max volume size: 16 Exabytes (theoretical), 137GB-256TB (actual)
- Drawback: Not fully-supported by other OS (MacOS can read only)
- Needed for Windows systems and ideal for drives that will interact with Windows

Features
1. Journaling: Data is re-read, verified and logged every time it is written. If problem, marked as bad and data is relocated. Makes recovery after power outages and crashes faster and more reliable.
2. Snapshots: Volume Shadow Copy Service makes read-only copies of files if file locked by a process (File version). => Allows for revert changes and backup operations
3. Security: File permission and Ownership, file access audit, quota management, and EFS (Encrypting File System / not on Windows Home) => Only authorized users can read and modify data
4. POSIX Compliance: NTFS supports case-sensitive naming, hard links, and other features of Unix/Linux applications.
5. Indexing: Indexing Service creates catalog of files and folder locations to speed up searches.
6. Dynamic Disks: Disk management lets space on multiple disks to be combined in one volume (Not on Windows Home)

### FAT32
- 32-bit File Allocation Table
- Maximum File size: 4GB - 1 byte
- No security features of NTFS

### exFAT
- 64-bit FAT file system for hard drive and flash media
- Supports large volumes, max of 512 TB
- Support for access permissions but not encryption

## Linux and MacOS File Systems
Some support for NTFS and FAT32 as removable media.

### Linux File System
- Some version of `ext` filesystem: ext3, ext4
- ext3: Standard Linux file system with Journaling support
- ext4: Better performance, best choice for new systems
- Can also support FAT32 (named VFAT)
- NFS (Network File System) can be used to mount remote storage devices.

### Apple File System (APFS)
- Proprietary
- Supports Journaling, snapshots, permission/ownership, and encryption

## OS Compatibility

Compatibility Concerns:
- Hardware
- Software app with OS
- host-to-host for exchanging data over network
- User training requirements

1. Hardware Compatibility and update limitations
- Newer OS versions can have hardware requirements for CPU, RAM or others (For ex. Windows 11 TPM v.2 requirement)

2. Software Compatibility
- Applications are designed to run on a particular OS
- App ecosystem (range of software availability) determines if an OS is established in the market

3. Network Compatibility
- Devices on different OSs can't communicate directly
- Common network protocol must be supported to exchange data in standard format

4. Training and Support
- New OS or OS versions adds challenges to users
- Upgrade program must include training, self-help resources, and technicians
- In business, upgrade limitations and compatibility issues make companies reluctant to update to new OS versions

In general, Compatibility issues are being mitigated by the use of web applications and cloud services, as only browser needs to be copatible, not whole system.
- Main compatibility issue for web platforms => touch interface, wide array of display resolutions, and different devices.

## Vendor life-cycle limitations

Typical life-cycle phases:
- Beta phase: To gather user feedback (Ex. Microsoft Insider Program)
- Supported phase: Release of regular patches (security and bug fixes) and updates (new functionality). Supported devices can install upgraded versions.
- Extended support: Product not available for purchase but continues to release critical patches. Devices might not be able to install OS upgrades
- EOL (End of Life): No longer supported. Security vulnerability if kept in use as they don't get patched.

# Compare Windows Editions

- Editions apply feature restrictions, pricing, and licensing models (Home, Professional, Enterprise) for different market segments
- Windows 10 and 11 are marketing umbrellas
- Windows is released in Editions, that support features that target particular market sectors
- Windows 10 has several iterations referred to as `feature updates`: Microsoft release paradigm where significant changes and new features are released via Windows Update on semiannual schedule

## Windows Versions

New version can have different UI, support different devices, and have different features.

### 32-bit vs 64-bit
- Windows 10 releases as 32 and 64 bit edition originally
- 32 Bit CPU can only run 32-bit editions
- 64-bit editions can run most 32-bit software, reverse not true
- 64-bit editions of Windows require 64-bit hardware device driveres "signed" or authorized by Microsoft
- Windows 11 is 64-bit only

### Desktop Styles
- Windows dekstop bread and butter: Start Menu, task bar, notification area.
- Feature updates have frequent adjustments of these elements (ex. dark themes feature update)
- Windows 11 style adjustements: Centers Task bar, new Start Menu design. Better support for multiple Desktops.

## Windows Home Edition
- Home users and Small Offices (SOHO)
- Windows 10 Home cannot be used to join Windows domain networks.
- Management task: Configuringsecure family use and simple file sharing  of pictures, music, and videos in workgroup network with other Windows devices.
- Windows 11 requires a Microsoft account and internet connection

### Windows Home Licensing
Two licensing models:
1. OEM license - Original Equipment Manufacturer
- OS pre-installed to PC/laptop and valid for that device only. Vendor responsible for support.
- Most new devices support Windows 11 upgrade

2. Retail license
- Can be transferred between computers, but only installed on single device at a time.
- Comes with Windows 11 upgrade rights

### Windows Home System Limitations
- No support for multiple CPUs, yes to multicore and Hyperthreading.
- 64-bit edition restricted to 128GB RAM

## Work and Education features
- Windows Pro: Small and medium sized business (OEM or retail license) -> Management features for network administrators more control over client's devices.
- Windows Enterprise: Full-feature set only available through volume licensing
- Windows Education/Pro: Licensing for schools and colleges

### Differences of Home vs Pro/Enterprise/Education
- Domain Network: Main difference of three is ability to join a domain network = IT can manage configurations of IT devices in the enterprise. Not available on Home Edition.
- Group Policy Editor (gpedit.msc): OS and software application settings for uniform Desktop style and settings. Not available on Home Edition.

- EFS - Encrypting File System -> To protect individual files and folders. Buit into the NTFS file system.
- BitLocker: Encrypt all information on a disk drive, protected even when stolen. Once you log out everythong is protected. FDE - Full-disk encryption. Not available on Home Edition.
- Workgroup network: PCs can share data and communicate, but each machine's user account DB is managed separately
- Corporate Network: Need for centrally manage user accounts and system policies => More machines to manage and security requirements
    - Each PC joins a `domain`
    - Accounts are managed on a `Domain Controller` server (DC)

- RDP - Remote Desktop Control: Home edition just has client Remote control software, not server.

## Windows Pro and Enterprise editions

### Pro
- Obtainable through OEM, retail license (FPP), and volume licensing.
- Volume licensing: Discount for number of devices or users
- Allows custom installation images for rapid deployment
- Windows Pro for Workstations supports more maximum RAM (6TB), up to 4 CPUs, advanced hardware technologies like Persistent System RAM (NVDIMM), and Resilient File System (ReFS), same file system as in Windows Server.

### Enterprise & Education
- Only available on volume licensing
- Supports Microsoft's DirectAccess Virtual Private Networking technology, AppLocker software execution control, and Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack.
- Less restrictive Hardware limits
- App Locker => Administator can decide which applications can and cannot run in Windows Enterprise environment
- Graular User Experience (UX) control => 
- Pro and Education: 
    - 2-way multiprocessing and up to 128 cores
    - RAM restricted to 2TB
- Pro for Workstation and Enterprise
    - 4-way multiprocessing and up to 256 cores
    - RAM restricted to 6TB

## Windows Upgrade Paths and Feature Updates
- In-place upgrade: Upgrade program launched from current OS. Data, config, and files should be preserved. Run a compatibility advisor tool before running upgrade.

### Upgrade Paths
- Upgrade path: Version of OS that supports in-place upgrade for future versions (Type `winver` to check vesion and check Windows docs for upgradability or upgrade path)
    Also to upgrade OS:
    - Check Harware compatibility (Minimum requirements) before updating
        - You can do this also by running the upgrade process as Windows will tell you if the system doesn't meet minimum requirements
    - Make sure applications and external hardware are compatible with new OS
- Windows: You can usually upgrade in the same or higher edition. 
    - Ex: Windows 7 home -> Windows 10 Home -> Windows 10 Pro
    - Cannot upgrade Home to Enterprise edition
    - Downgrading sometimes supported (Retains docs and data, not apps and settings)

### Feature Updates
- Feature Updates identified with number on Windows ex. 1607 (July 2016)
- Current version Windows 10 21H2 (Second half of 2021)
- Windows updated periodically with quality updates > Sometimes new features, and can produce compatibility problems (Less likely)

# Professor Maesser

## Multiple devices

### Windows Workgroups
Multiple device on Home => Windows Workgroups
- Connect multiple devices to network
- Each device a standalone system, every machine is a peer

### Windows Domain
Multiple devices on business setting => Active directory in Windows Domain
- Business Network
- Centralized authentication and device access
- Support thousands of devices across many networks

Definitions
- domain: Group of related objects (users, pcs, resources)
- Windows Domain: Collection of objects in a Microsoft's Active Directory network
- A Windows Domain is essentially an Active Directory domain
