# Managing Security Settings

- Domain controllers send security requirements to workstations in Windows domain (For example: complex password)

## Password Best practices

- Password authentication has long history of vulnerabilities: inadequate tech and poor password practices
- Strong password important as not all companies switch to MFA

### Password rules
- Long password: +12 characters for user accounts, longer for administrative ones.
- Memorable phrase: Something you can remember, but no personal information => Anything that an attacker could find out should not be used

Common password policies
- Complexity requirements: Mix of character types 
- Password expiry: Passwords only valid for a certain period of time.

- These are sometimes deprecated as they incentivise bad practices like writting it down.

### BIOS/UEFI password
- System User password => Password before the OS can boot
    - Configured at BIOS or UEFI
    - Shared by all users so not commonly used
    - Extra security on standalone computer with no interactive logon

- System/Supervisor password
    - Potects access to firmware system-setup program
    - System user password requires System/Supervisor password

- Pre-boot authentication
    - Supported (maybe) by PCs with UEFI firmaware
    - System loads authentication application that contacts auth server and lets user submit credentials for an account

## End User Best practices

Complement good password practices with secure use of workstation:
1. Log off when not in use: Lunch Time attack. USe Starl+L to automatically lock screen.
2. Secure and protect critical hardware: From theft using a cable lock.
3. Secure Personal Identifiable Information (PII) and passwords: Careful where you put paper records. Clean desk policy.

## Account Management

Account management: What rights and privileges an employee is assigned.

### Restrict User Permissions

- File permissions: If user can read and write files on a PC or network. Responsability of user and server admin.
- Rights and privileges: what system configurations changes a user can make to a PC. Responsability of network owner.

- Permissions and rights should follow `Least Privilege` principle
- Admin accounts should be the least as possible.

### Change default administrator account and password
- OS could have active default administrator accounts (root/superuser in Linux and Administrator in Windows) => Ultimate target for hackers
- If possible these accounts should be disabled during OS installation and accessed via UAC or sudo
- If not possible to disable => Change default username and password and treat it with highest level of security.
- All uses of Administrator account should be logged

### Disable guest account
- Allows unauthenticated use and some network access-
- Disabled by default in Windows
- Enabled for passwordless files sharing in Windows Workgroup

## Account Policies
- Supplement best practices by enforcing policies and controls by OS
    - Standalone Workstation: Configured on Local Security Policy (secpol.msc) and Group Policy Editor snap-in (gpedit.msc)
    - Windows Domain: Configured on Group Policy Object (GPO) and applied to PCs and user accounts in domain and OU (Organizational Units)
    - Not available in Home Edition

### Account policies:
- Restrict login times => Limit what times a user can log in the network. Automatic logout if no authorization.
- Failed attempts lockout => Number of incorrect sign in attempts. Account gets disabled.
- Concurrent logins => Limits amount of concurrent sessions a user can open
- Timeout / screen lock => Locks system if inactive for defined time.

Unlock account or Reset password: `Properties -> Account (tab)`

## Execution Control

- Execution control is logical security technology to prevent malicious software from running on host
- Establishes security system that doesn't only rely on good behavior of user

### Trusted / Untrusted Software Sources

- Restricting users to run unauthorized code necessary to prevent malware
- Windows uses UAC (User Account Control) and Administrator and User account system to enforce restrictions

- Windows software developers can make digital signatures to prove authenticity and integrity of software package. Linux also prompts to install untrusted software.
- Mobile vendors use wall gardened model of software distribution too
- Also third party managment suites to enforce application control => blocklist or allow list

### Auto Run & Auto Play

- Legacy Windows => Optical drive would have `Auto Run` (autorun.inf) => Problem for Malware
- Modern version of Windows `Auto Play` dialog box
- Auto Play can be configured on drive's property dialog box
- UAC requires user to explicitely allow code to run => `Settings > Auto Play Actions`

## Windows Defender AntiVirus
- Many ways to install Malware on a PC even with Execution control. Or it could run things that don't require installation.
- AV (AntiVirus) software that can detect malware and prevent it from executing
    - Uses database of patterns called definitions, signatures, and patterns.
    - Or Heuristic Identification => AV uses info of things viruses try to do.
    - AV better described as anti-malware => Not only Viruses but spyware, Trojans, rootkits, ransomware, cryptominers.

- Windows Defender AV is managed via Windows Security Center
- Installed and enabled by default

### Windows Defender AV Updated Definitions
Necessary regular AV updates:
1. Definition/patterns update: Info on new viruses and malware. Done on Windows Update periodically.
2. Scan engine / component updates => improve or fix scan software itself

- AV can be permanently disabled via Group Policy
- You can exclude folders from scanning => Disk images, VMs (Performance problems)
    - Legit software or dev code also trigger also trigger false-positives.
- Check status of antivirus regulary

## Windows Defender Firewall
- Personal/host firewall filters inbound and outbound traffic
- You can enable/disable for given network profile or add exceptions
- Default policy inbound and outbound traffic as Block or Allow

- Advanced Security in Windows Defender Firewall allows custom rules: Each rule can be set as a block or allow action to override default policy for:
        `Port Security`: TCP or UDP port numbers (Ex. block TCP/80)
        `Application Security`: Triggers based on process that listens for connection
        `Address`: Triggers based on IP or FQDN
- On a domain, Advanced Firewall can be configured through Group Policy
- On PC or workgroup in the wf.msc management console
- Enable, disable or configure Inbound or Outbound  folders in Advanced Firewall console.

## Ecnrypting File System
- Data (files and folders) can be protected with an Access Control List (ACL)
- Data on persistent drives refered to as Data-at-Rest (vs Data-in-use / RAM or data-in-transit / sent over network)
- Data-at-Rest can be protected with encryption

### Encrypting File System (EFS)
- Encryption can be applied to specific files and folders
- Not available on Windows Home
- Enable by opening `Properties of folder -> Advanced button -> Check Encrypt Content box`
- Encrypted folders show with green color in Explorer
- Encryption is only as strong as user authentication (user's password)
- User password gives access to the encryption key => If key is lost or damaged danger of data loss
    - If user password reset
    - user profile damaged
    - Windows reinstalled
- Backup the key or set up recovery agents in Windows domain.

## Windows Bitlocker and Bitlocker To Go
- Bitlocker provides full disk encryption (Not on Home Edition)
- Processing overhead
- Advantage: No need to remember to encrypt data
- Also encrypts swap file, print queues, temporary files.

- Bit locker to Go => Use of bit locker on removable drives
- To decrypt data encryption key is needed
- Bitlocker can use TPM to tie use of a specific disk to a particular motherboard
- TPM stores encryption key and ensures integrity of OS
- Encryption key can be stored on removable smart key or USB stick
- Manage TPM settings in Windows using TPM management snap-in
- Recovery key generated on TPM setup => Store it on removable drive and sotre separately from the computer. It will recover encrypted drive if startup key is lost.

# Configure Browser Security

## Browser selection and installation
- Trusted sources
    - Trusted vendor important as browsers are security-critical types of software.
    - Check integrity of installer => vendor's code signing certificate or comparing hash published by developer with downloaded one
- Untrusted Sources
    - A tampered browser or an untrusted source => Danger of malware, spyware, unwanted adverts, redirection attacks, bloatware.
- Pontentially Unwanted Application (PUA) => Software that is not malicious but has high privacy risk

## Browser Extensions and Plugins
- Extensions
    - Add or change functionality via browser API
    - Ex. Change toolbar or menu options
    - Run scripts with sufficient permissions => Can be asecurity vulnerability
- Plugins
    - Play or show some type of content on a website 
    - Can only interact with multimedia object on the page
    - They can have multiple vulnerabilities => Rarely used or supported these days
    - Dynamic content served with improved HTML these days
- Apps
    - Document editing in browser 
- Default search provider
    - Sets site to perform web searches directly on address bar
- Themes
    - Change appereance of browser
    - It can expose bowser to coding vulnerabilities via specially crafted image files

- All extensions or plug-ins pose security risks.
- Distinguisg between trusted and untrusted sources

## Browser Settings
- Access settings via Hamburger menu or `chrome://settings`, `about:preferences` (Firefox) in the URL
- Advanced settings `chrome://flags` or `about:config`

### Sign-in and browser data sync
- Browser sign ins allow settings syncronization for different devices
- Bookmarks, history, passwords, and auto-fill can also be syncronized

### Password manager
- Major browsers support password managers => Password storage and strong password suggestion
- Drawback: Not all sites present sign-in form in a recognizable way for the password manager

## Secure Connections and Valid Certificates
- Web uses TLS and certificates to implement secure web connections
- Secure connection validates identity of host and encrypts communications to protect against snooping.
- Identity of web server validated by Certificate Authority
    - Certificate installed on a server has a public key
    - Certificate signed by CA
    - If client trusts CA by installing root certificate in trusted store, server can trust server presenting the certificate
    - Padlock is shown url if trusted site
- Installing bogus root certificate on machine is a way of hacking
- Edge uses Windows certificate store, other browser vendors use different store
- Internal or enterprise certificates for internal sites => Ensure internal CA certificate installed in browser

## Browser privacy settings
- Privacy controls are to prevent profiles for advertising purposes (cookies to remember who you are)
- Browser can be set to enable or disable all cookies and to configure exceptions
- Sites can use Browser fingerprinting as well to track users
Supplement of cookie and tracking protection:
- Pop-up blockers: Prevents site from creating dialogs or additional windows => Used for fake AV warnings and ads
- Ad Blockers: Prevents display of content that is not part of sites main functionality
    - they use DBs of IPs and domains that serve ads
    - Usually installed as an extension
    - Many sites detect ad blockers and don't display content if filtering enabled

Concerns on data stored on browser:
- Clearing cache and browsing data options:
     - By default browser keeps history and caches sites visited
     - On public PC is better to clear cache automatically or manually
- Private/Incognito browsing mode:
    - Disables caching feature in the browser (no cache, cookies, history, passwords stored beyond session)
    - Doesn't warranty anonimity in browsing => Sites still able to harvest data and fingerprint browser

# Troubleshoot Workstation Security Issues

## Malware Vectors
malware: Software that doesn't something bad for host
vector: method by which the malware executes and spreads

Types of malware according to vector:
- Viruses
    - Conceled within executable code (.exe, .msi, .dll, .com, .scr, .jar)
    - When program executes, virus runs code with same prviliges as infected process
    - Modern viruses use covert methods to take control of host
- Boot sector viruses:
    - Infect boot sector code or partition table on disk drive.
    - Virus hijackes bootloader to load itself into the process
- Trojans
    - Malware concealed into installer package that appears legitimate
    - Installed alongside program and execute with same privileges
    - It could add itself to startup location to always execute when computer starts
- Worms
    - Replicate between processes in system memory, instead of infecting and executable file
    - They can spread between hosts in a network
- Fileless malware
    - Malicious code that uses host's scripting environment (Powershell, PDF Javascipt)
    - They create malicious processes in memory
    - Can be disguised as script isntruction => Harder to detect

## Malware Payloads
Malware classification by entry point.

### Backdoors
- Modern Malware designed to implement backdoor, or Remote Access Trojan (RAT)
- Once infected it allows threat actor to access PC and do more actions:
    - Install more malware
    - DDOS attacks
    - Access rest of network
- Threat actos must establish connection from compromised host to Command and Control (C2 or C&C)
    - Many ways of implementing covert C&C channel to avoid detection:
            IRC protocol in the past
            - Command sequences embedded into HTTPS or DNS traffic

### Spyware and keyloggers
- Spyware: Can perform browser reconfigurations, monitor local application activity, take screenshots, activate recording devices, DNS redirection to spoofed sites.
- Keylogger: Records keystrokes. For discovering passwords or Credit Card numbers. Can be software or hardware.

### Rootkits
- Windows: Malware can only be installed with local admin privileges
- Windows tries to protect OS files from abuse of admin privileges => Critical processes run with higher level of privilege (SYSTEM)
    - Trojans installed as regular software cannot entrely conceal their presence and show up as running processes.
- Rootkit: Malware that can run without requiring any authorization (SYSTEM priviliges) or that can escalate privileges after installation.
    - Can modify system files at Kernel level to conceal its presence
    - Term comes from root in Linux, processes that have access to to everythong from the root of file system down.
    - Windows uses code signing to prevent misuse of Kernel processes
    - A rootkit can compromise system files and programming interfaces so that local processes don't reveal their presence (Explorer, Task Manager, `ps` or `top` in Linux, or `netstat`). IT can also erase logs to make it harder to find.

## Ransomware and Crypto Miners
- Software that extorts victim for money
- One class of randomware show threatening messages => Apparently blocks file system by installing different shell program => Not hard to fix
- Crypto ransomware attempts to encrypt files => Hard to mitigate unless user has file backup
    -Ex. Cryptolocker: Trojan that looks for files to encrypt and asks for ransom with a countdown
- Cryptominer hijacks resources from host to perform cryptomining.

## Troubleshoot desktop symptoms

- Different vectors and payloads => Many symptoms for Malware infection
- Rule of thumb: Activity or configuration change not done by user => Suspect malware

### Performance symptoms
- PC fails to boot or experiences lockups
- Performance at startup slow
- Host cannot access network or Internet is slow

- Run antivirus. If nothing detected quarantine system or putting under close monitoring.

### Aplication Crashes and Service Problems

- Typical malware issue: Security applications stop working (AV, Firewall, Windows Update)
    - OS Updates and virus definition updates fail
    - Task manager or Windows tools stop working or crash

- Software applications are often targeted as well
    - Software that uses browser plugins (Adobe PDF or Flash player)

### File System Errors and Anomalies
- Missing or renamed files
- Additional executable with similar names to authentic system files an utilities
- Altered system or personal files with datestamps and file sizes different from know good versions
- Files with changed permission attributes

### Desktop Alerts and Notifications
- Most of the times, to get malware in system requires for user to explicitly install product and confirm UAC prompt.
- Common trick : Misuse notification system to trick or frighten the user to isntall malware (Ex. False virus alert)
- Rouge AntiVirus => Popular way to disguise a trojan. Website shows pop-up that looks like Windows dialog box wit fake security alert.
- Fake calls claiming to be Microsoft's support to enable Remote Desktop control is a popular attack these days

## Troubleshoot Browser Symptoms
- Malware often targets the browser.

### Redirection
- User opens a page but is sent to another one => To show ads or steal credentials
- Can happen when typing manually of with search results
Mitigation
- Check HOSTS file, legacy means of mapping Domain names to IP address => Often targeted by malware
- Verify which DNS server client is configure to use, compare results between suspect machine and known-good workstation

### Certificate warnings
Causes for certificate warnings
- CA self-signed or issues by CA that is not trusted
- FQDN requested by browser different from subject name listed in certificate
- Certificate has expired or revoked

These messages could show a misconfigurations  or malware attempting to redirect the browser to spoofed page.

Also it could be indicator of on-path attack (Man-in-the-middle):
1. User requests connection to site and inspects certificate
2. MAlware or evil-twin AP presents own spoofed certificate to user/browser. If malware is able to compromise trusted root certificate, browser shows no warning.
3. If broswer accepts or user overrides warning malware implements proxy and forwards request to the site
4. Malware is in the middle of the session and can intercept and modify traffic that would normally be encrypted.

## Best Practices for Malware Removal
Seven steps CompTIA:
1. Investigate and verify malware symptoms
2. Quarantine infected systems
3. Disable System Restore in Windows
4. Remediate infected systems
    - Update anti-malware software
    - Scanning and removal techniques (safe mode, pre-installation environment)
5. Schedule scans and run updates
6. Enable System Restore and create a restore point in Windows
7. Educate end user

- Most malware discovered with AV scan.
- Antivirus vendors maintain "bestiaries" or malware encyclopedias with complete info about type, symptoms, removal, etc. => Use source to verifysymtoms you discover

## Infected System Quarantine

- Malware detected and verified => Apply quarantine and disable System Restore

### Quarantine Infected Systems
- If PC under suscpicion => Don't allow users with admin privileges to sign in until quarantined. Reduces risk of malware compromising privileges account.

- Quarantine means PC not able to communicate with main network. Worms propagate over networks. => Disconnect network link,
- Sandbox: Move infected system to physically or logically secure segment or Sandbox (Insulated computing environment)
- Scan and remove removable media that was attached to computer

### Disable System Resource
- Disable System Restore and automatic backup systems like File History => Backups could be infected too
- Ideally delete old system restore points. If you need them use AV to determie if they are infected.

## Malware Removal Tools and Methods

- AV software is main tool.
    - Fully updated before running scan
    - Could not be effective if system is infected => Remove disk and scan it from a different system
        - Check that updates have not been disabled by malware.
    
    - AV might be able to remove (cleaning) infection from file, quarantine the file or erase it.

### Recovery mode
- Infections by advanced Malware require manual removal steps to disable persistence mechanisms
Tools for manual removal and reconfiguration:
- Task Manager: Terminate suspicious processes
- `regedit` => Command to add or remove registry items
- `msconfig` => To perform boot into Safe Mode, may prevent infected code from running at startup
- Boot PC using product disc or recovery media. Use Windows Preinstallation env (WinPE) to run commands from clean command env
- Remove disk from infected system => Scan it from another system

### OS Reinstallation
- AV could not recover data from infected files
- If malware gains persistent foothold running antivirus couldn't run => Complete system restore
    - Reformatting disk
    - Reinstall OS and software (from previous snapshot)
    - Restoring data files from (clean) backup

## Malware Infection Prevention
After cleanup, measures to prevent reinfection:

### Configure On-Access Scanning
- On-Access: AV intercepts call from OS to open file and scans it first => Reduces performance but prevents better alware infection

### Configure Scheduled scans
- Configure regular scans => Improve performance but necessary
- Configure automatic updates of malware-pattern and antivirus-engine

### Re-enable System Restore and Services

- Create freash restore point and clean data backup
- Validate security-critical services and settings that might have been compromised by malware
- Verify DNS config. => Prevent DNS spoofing
- Re-enable Software firewalls: Malware with admin privileges could have changed Firewall to facilitate C&C connection.
    - Unauthorized port could faciitate reinfection of machine
    - Reset policies to default
- Complete another antivirus scan

### Educate end user

- Untrained users are a serious vulnerabiity => Social engineering and Phishing attacks
Important topics:
1. Password and account-manageent
2. Education about common social engineering and malware threats (phishing, website exploits)
3. Secure use of software (browser) and email clients plus appropiate use of internet access
4. Specific anti-phishing training:
    - Identify indicators of spoofed comunication
    - Inconsisten sender and reply addreses
    - disguised links
    - copied text and images
    - Exaggerated urgency or risk claims








