# Network addressing and internet connections

LANs have limited utility. It's only when a LAN is connected to a WAN that it becomes really useful.
This requires modems, antennas used by the ISP that can identify each network and forward data to them.
The Forwarding function is done by router devices and the Internet Protocol (IP)

## Internet connection types and Modems

- Core of internet: High-bandwidth fiber optic links connection Internet Exchange Ports (IXPs) => Mostly created by telecommunication companies and academic institutions
- ISP establish high-speed links between their networks, carrying and sending traffic to parts of the internet they don't own.
- Customers connect to internet via ISP network to the nearest `Point of Presence (PoP)`
- `Internet Connection Type` => media, hardware, and protocols that connect a local network to an ISP's PoP.
- WAN interface => point-to-point
- Ethernet connections => NICs and Switches, but connection to WAN with a type of digital Modem.

## Router
- Digital Modem connects to an external line
- Built in Switch connects devices on LAN (A standalone Switch can't assign IP addresses)
- External line (wall) connects to ISPs Point of Presence - PoP
- Routers implement an IP to be able to route data packages to differet devices
    - There's a LAN IP (private - typically 198.168.0.0) and a WAN ip (public - any IP number)

## Digital Subscriber Line Modems (DSL Modems - RJ11)

### PSTN - Public Switched Telephone Network
- Many internet connection types use Public Switched Telephone Network
- Fiber optic core
- Twisted Copper pair at the edges -> Plain Old Telephone System (POTS)
- Faster than dial-up internet, slower than COAX

#### Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)

Usage of higer frequencies on this copper lines as communication channels. 
Different flavors of DSL:
    - Assymetrical DSL (ADSL)
        - Fast download but slow upload
        - ADSL 2 => Down 24MBps up 1.25-2.5 MBPs
    - Symmetric
        - Same upload and download speeds
        - More used in businesses

#### DSL modem
- Separate or integrated to th SOHO router
- Has a RJ11 connector for the telephone cabling
- RJ45 connects model to router (in standalone DSL modem)

## Cable Modems (Coax)
- Coaxial cable => 
- Cable based on the Data Over Cable Service Interface Specification (DOCSIS) => Download up to 38MBps and uplinks up to 27MBps
- DOCSIS 3 => Greater bandwidth
- COAX connects the Modem with a Cable Modem Termination System (CMTS) in the street that fowards data via de fiber backbone.

## Fiber to the curve and Fiber to the premises
Bandwidth in the last mile is the greates obstacle for data to travel as fast as in a LAN, as it usually has low-grade copper wire.
Fiber to the X (FTTx) are projects trying to fix this

### Fiber to the Curb and VDSL (FTTC)
- Extends fiber optic cable from PoP (Point of Presence) to a communications cabinet servicing multiple clients.    
- Service providers based in telephone networks use Very High-Speed DSL (DSL) to provide a FTTC service.
- VDSL allows symmetric and assymetric modes.
    - DSL 52 Mbps down, 6Mbps up
    - VDSL: 26 Mbps both directinos
    - VDSL2: 100mbps both directions

### Fiber to the premises (FTTP)
- Fiber cable all the way to customers building
- Passive Optical Network (PON) => single fiber cable run from Optical Line Terminal (OLT) to a splitter
- A splitter routes traffic to the customer on a Optical Network Terminal (ONT). ONT is a box on premise that received fiber optic connection. https://neosnetworks.com/resources/blog/optical-network-terminal-ont/
- ONT connects to the customer's router with an RJ45 connector

## Fixed Wireless Internet Access
For when running cable is not possible or too costly.

### Geostationary Orbital Satellite Intenet access (Ex. Starlink)
- Satellite based micro-wave radio system: 2-6MBps up, 30 MBps down.
- Delay due to large distance of signal => Not great for real time applications
- RTT: Round Trip Time
- It's installed with a Satellite dish (VSAT) on the premise pointing towards the stationary satellite in the equator
- Antenna connected to a Digital Video Broadcast Satellite Modem (DVB-S)

#### Low Earth Orbital (LEO) Satellite Internet access
- Lower orbit satellites => Better bandwidth and lower latency
- More satellites in array => Dish requires an automatic motor to align with satellites
- Satellite needs clear view of all the sky

#### Wireless Internet Service Provider (WISP)
- Ground-based long range fixed access wireless (antennas)
- Line of sight between Antenna and customer receiver must remain unobstructed
- If unlicensed spectrum => Interference

All wireless communications can be affected my weather conditions like snow, rain, and high winds

## Celular radio Internet connections
Fixed wireless => large dish antenna
2.4 and 5GHz => Short range

- Cellular radio internet allow for mobile devices to connect. 
- Cells (sections) of the network that have antennas at the edges.

### Generations
#### 2G
- Original cellular network
- Two standards (below): GSM and CDMA
- Good for voice communications, not good for data

#### 3G
- Cellular radio connects to closer base station
- Cell: Area served by a base station (up to 5 miles / 8km)
- Operates between 850 and 1800 MHz band
- Low frequency bands don't need so much power to communicate over long distances
- Better data support than 2G: Allowed for GPS, video and audio streaming

2 formats:
 - GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications): Applies to phones with removable Subscriber Identity Module (SIM)
 - Core Division Multiple Access (CDMA): Directly managed by the provider, no SIM card. Info sent with particular code, your device filters your communication's code. Not popular in other parts of the world.

Codes representing 3G services:
 3G => 3MBps
    - Universal Mobile Telecommunications (UMTS) on a GSM handset 
    - Evolution Data Optimized (EV-DO) on CDMA networks

- H/H+ => High speed Packet Access (HSPA) Up to 42MBps, but likely much lower.

#### 4G Long-Term Evolution (LTE). 
- Supported by both GSM and CDMA network providers (Converged standard between providers)
- Needs a SIM card (Based on GSM and Edge)
- Up to 150 Mbps
- LTE-A => Up to 300 MBps

#### 5G (2020)
- Use of different spectrum bands (sub-6GHz) to medium/high (20-60 GHz)
- High frequency bands require proximity and can't travel through walls and windows
- Rolling out 5G is complex => Many smaller antennas instead of one bigger one. => Massive Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO)
- Eventually 10GBps, slower speeds 100-900 MBps
- If speed can be increased, IoT devices will be much capable.

** 4G and 5G can be used for fixed-access wireless broadband for homes and businesses. **

## Routers

Intermediate system that can distingish between the LAN and WAN and interact with them.
- Implemented with the TCP/IP protocol
- Switch and APs fowards packages using MAC addresses, Router fowards packages using IP addresses ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
- Digital Modems, ONT, and cellular radio transmiter create a point-to-point link.
- To connect a LAN to a network you need a router
- Rotuers connect devices to a Modem. Standalone Router has only one connection and IP address. Provides internal PCs with IP addresses.
- IP address contains the address of a Network and a single host within that Network

LAN router
- Divides single physical network in multiple logical sub-networks
- Each logical sub-network is a seaparate broadcast domain
- Usually only Ethernet interfaces

WAN / border router
- Forwards traffic to and from the internet over private WAN link
- Ethernet interface for local network and Digital Modem interface for the WAN

## Firewalls

Determines what devices are allowed to connect to a network and what kind of traffic they can accept
- Firewall implements a rule set called a network Access Control List (ACL)
- ACL determines wether to allow or block traffic on different ports
- Routers implement some type of firewall
- It can be implemented as a standalone appliance that makes deeper analysis of application protocol => Unified Threat Management (UTM)

# Basic TCP/IP concepts
Technician must be able to configure TCP/IP on PCs and SOHO routers

TCP/IP is a protocol suite, that acts on different layers of network communications. This means that TCP/IP is a combination of different protocols that allow data flow in different layers.

## 4 layers TCP/IP
1. Application -> https, dns, smb, ISMP, PoP3...
    - Used to operate services, like web and email, beyond addressing costs and transporting data
    - Each application uses TCP and UDP port

2. Transport -> TCP / UDP
How each host manages multiple connections at the same time.
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol): 
    - Indentifies missing or out of order packages => mitigates unreliability of IP
    - Used by most application protocols to ensure data integrity and avoid errors
UDP (User Datagram Protocol):
    - Unreliable connectionless forwarding.
    - Faster
    - Used in time-sentitive applications (speech video) where missing or out of order packages are acceptable
    - Glitch instead of crashing

3. Internet -> IP (Layer 3)
- Deals with addressing
- Packet addressing and routing in a network of networks
- Devices are end system host
- Data from network to another must be forwarded by an intermediary system (Router) 
- Best effort delivery => Unreliable and connectionless. Packages can be lost or delivered out of sequence.
- NAT => Converts public IPs to private IPs and viceversa
- ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) => Allows host to query which MAC address is associated to an IP address

4. Link / Network interface -> Ethernet / Wifi (Layer 2 , and 1 (hardware))
- Puts frames into physical network
- Local level with nodes identified by MAC addresses
- ARP: Table mapping private IPs to MAC addresses 

### Protocol Data Units (Extra)
User data goes down this stack from say a website or email all the way to the network card of the receiving host

1. Application layer => Data (Https, FTP, DHCP, SMTP, IMAP, PoP3, SSH, etc)
2. Transport Layer => Segment (Data + Transport Header) (TCP / UDP)
3. Network Layer (Layer 3) / Internet => Packet (Network Header + Transport Header + Data) (IP)
4. Link => (Layer 2) Frame (Frame + Network Header + Transport Header + Data) . Frames are different for ethernet and wifi (Router)
    4.2 (Layer 1) Phsysical => Bits

## IPV4 addressing
- IP provides network and hosting `addressing` and `packet forwarding` between networks
- IP adds a header to whatever package is being transported in the payload
- 32 bit number divided in four 8-bit ones (octets)
- Can be represented by 4 decimal 8-bit numbers (0-255) separated by a period Ex. 192.168.0.1

## Network Prefixes
Ex. 192.168.0.1/24
- IP addres = Network Address + Host Address / Network Id + Host Id => 192.168.0 (Network Id) + .1 (Host Id)
- Network Prefix: 
    - `11111111 11111111 11111111 00000000` 32 bit numbers with continuous bits set to `1`
    - Slash notations: `/24`
    - Subnet Mask notation `255.255.255.0`
    It represents the number of bits that separate the Network Id from the Host Id in the 32-bit representation of the IP address. If there's a one, the binary digit is part of the network ID.

Subnet name is becase IP network can be divided into multiple logical subnetworks (subnets) with this method.

- Subnet masks is typically used in host configuration dialogs:
    - 192.168.0.0/24 -> Refers to an IP network address
    - 192.168.0.0/255.255.255.0 -> Refers to host address on that IP network

## IPV4 Forwarding
### Same network communication
- 192.168.0.100/24 sends package to 192.168.0.200/24
    - Protocol compares src and dest addresses and determines it's in the same IP Network or subnet (192.168.0.0)
    - On Ethernet, the host will use Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) to identify the MAC address of the destination IP address
### Different networks
- 192.168.0.100/24 sends package to 192.168.1.100/24
    - Host identifies dest is on a different IP network
    - Hosts have a `default gateway` which is the address of the router to which the host can send packages to other networks
    - Default gateway must be in the same IP network as the host => `$ ip route ` or `$ route -n` commands to see default gateway

## Public and Private addressing
Every host requires a ISP-provided IP address to connect to the internet. There's a limited amount of IPV4 addresses, and there's mechanism to work around this limitations.

### Private address ranges
There are 3 reserved ranges for private addresses. A host in these ranges cannot communicate with the internet, only LAN:
10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255

Learn these to recognize them: 10 | 172.16 | 192.168

### Address classes and default Subnet Masks

A: `255.0.0.0` or `/8` or `11111111 00000000 00000000 00000000`  => For big orgs that have many hosts
B: `255.255.0.0` or `/16` or `11111111 11111111 00000000 00000000`
C: `255.255.255.0` or `/24` or `11111111 11111111 11111111 00000000` => For smaller orgs

### Internet Accessing using Private Addressing
A host with a private ip address cannot communicate with the internet, so it needs a mechanism to forward packages.


1. Network Address Translation (NAT)
 - Router: Through a router configured with a single or block of valid IP addresses: Router uses Network Address Tranlation (NAT) to turn private address into public one.
 - A NAT Table will keep track of the mapping between private IP + port and public ip + port communications to be able to forward and reverse-translation to the device that requested it.
2. Proxy server: Through Proxy server that fulfills requests on behalf of clients and caches data for improved performance.

## IPV4 Host Address configuration
A host must be configured with:
1. Static IPV4 address
2. Subnet (As decimal notation or prefix length in bits (ex. 24))
3. Gateway -> Router IP in LAN network (there's a default)
    Failure to specify it can limit the hosts communication to the local network only
4. DNS / Alternative DNS (it has default value)
    A DNS server IPV4 address. Typically primary DNS address is the same as the gateway address. Router is configured to send DNS queries to a secure resolver. An additional alternative DNS address can be added (ex. 8.8.8.8 Google - 1.1.1.1 Cloudflare, or ISP)
    - Private DNS can resolve local network domains and also cache existing registries.
    - If they can find the address they use a DNS forwarding to find the associated address 
    - Primary DNS usually on DNS server or Router. Hosts can also have a specific public DNS, but it's not DNS forwarding.

## Static vs Dynamic host address configuration

### Static IP
- Static ip requires admin to manually set up the host's IP. If it changes network or subnet it has to be manually changed.
- On a large network it can be very time consuming
- Typically assinged to services with a specific functionality like router or application server

### Dynamic IP (DHCP)
- Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) => Provides IP, subnet mask, default gateway, and DNS server address.

### Automatic Private IP address (APIPA)
- Automatic Private IP addressing (APIPA): Automatic failover mechanism for when IP config specifies using a DHCP server but the host cannot contact one.
- When Host using APIPA it can communicate with other hosts in the network using APIPA, but cannot communicate with hosts that have found a DHCP lease.
- APIPA => Microsoft / Link Local => Other vendors 

## SOHO Router Configuration
A SOHO Router has multiple interfaces, a Modem facing the public internet and Ethernet for internal LAN.
- Both interfaces need a IP address and subnet mask.
- Router's public IP is determined by the IP
- Some services offer static public IPs, otherwise it's configured using the ISP's DHCP server.
- Identifying a public IP: Not on the private range (10. - 172.16 - 31. - 192.168.), doesn't start with 0, or is 244.x.y.x and above

### Configuration (Manual)
- On browser, go to 192.168.0.1 or 192.168.1.1 or default gateway IP - Router vendor defines this address (Host must be in the same range as the router)
- Login with default password (see vendor manual)

Security
- Avoid configuring routers on cloud-based solutions / remote administration, as it could give access to your router to unwanted actors.
- Change the default password, as anyone can know it from documentation
- Secure local configuration and maybe SSH to ensure sessions are encrypted
- Disable access via wireless and http to make it more secure
- Basic settings
    - Configure WAN interface => A lot of time it defaults to DHCP, but there's other options depending on what you want to do
        Ex. L2TP tunnel => VPN connections
    - You can disable DCHP leases in the router if you have another device providing leases for clients.
    - Set static DNS (Optional)
    - DHCP reservations (IPs for printers for example)
    - Firewall: If Router is the firewall ensure SPI firewall is enabled for IPV4 and IPV6
- Port Forwarding (Optional): Communication from the WAN interface to a particular endpoint in computer (A website for example)
- Always update the firmware (never interrupt the firmware update)

## IPV6
- Private addressing and NAT provide workable solutions in IPV4, but IPV6 is intended to replace IPV4 completely.
- IPV6 is a 128 bit numbers, vs 32-bit from IPV4
- Written in hexadecilaml notation. Divided into 8-double-byte (16 bit) values
- First 64 bits: Network address, Last 64 bits: Interface ID
- Most ISPs receive allocations of /32 blocks and issue clients with a /48 prefix to use on a private network. => 65,336 possible subnets

### Global and Link Local address
- IPV6 usually have multiple addresses:
    1. Global Address: Unique address on the internet, starts with 2 or 3
    2. Link-local: Used in local segment to communicate with hosts.

- StateLess Address Auto Configuration (SLAAC): Host obtain a global and local-link via the local router
- IPV6 doesn't need to be configured with a default gateway => It uses Neighbor Discovery (ND) protocol
- ND implements SLAAC and performs address querying that ARP does in IPV4

### Dual Stack
- Transitioning to IPV6 has been very difficult
- Hosts and routers support both IPV4 and IPV6
- Host attempts to connect via IPV6, if not succesful, it goes with IPV4

# Compare Protocols and Ports

Compare TCP and UPD

## Protocols and Ports
- Link layer => Allows local frame communication via MAC addresses (ARP)
- Internet Layer => IP provides addressing and routing functionality
- Transport layer
    - Transport layer assigns each application a Port (0 - 65535). Ex. http port 80, email port 25
    - Multiplex => Sending mutiple segments (http or email for example) on a same port onto the same network link.

Traffic send from hosts as layer 3 packets encapsulated in layer 2 frames.
- Application Layer

### How can multiple conversations be tracked?
- Host assigns two ports:
    - Destination: The port of the resource being requested (For example. port 80)
    - Source: Random assigned port by clients (ex. 47892). Determines which application will use the data.
- Server:
    - Destination: Uses client's source port as destination for it's replies (47892) or to which application the data is addressed to
    - Source: Uses client's destination port as source

## TCP - Transmission Control Protocol

- IP transmits data as a series of packages
- Packages can be damaged or fail to arrive

### Connection Oriented protocol
As a connection-oriented protocol, TCP/IP mitigates this problem by:

1. Connection between sender and receiver with a handshake: SYN - SYN/ACK - ACK package sequence.
2. Assigns each package sequence number to keep them in order
3. Receiver can acknowledge (ACK) a package has been received
4. Receiver can send Negative Acknowledgement (NACK) to force retransmission
5. Allows graceful termination with FIN handshake

- It requires multiple header fields, adding up to 20 bytes to each package.
- TCP is used when an application cannot tolerate a faulty or missing package, like in HTTP/S and SSH communications

## UDP - User DataGram Protocol
- Connectionless protocol => No sequencing or acknowledgement
- Faster but less reliable
- Suitable for applications that can tolerate missing, out-of-order, or faulty packages
- Good for audio and video streaming

### Protocols that use UDP
- DHCP => To get IP data from ISP if the package is not received it can be requested again
- TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol) => Used by network devices to obtain configuration file, uses own achnowledgement process so it doesn't require TCP.

## Well Know Ports
20: FTP - Data Connection | TCP
21: FTP - Control connection | TCP
22: SSH | TCP
23: Telnet | TCP
25: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol | TCP
53: DNS (Domain Na
me System) | TCP/UDP
67: DHCP server | UDP
68: DHCP client | UDP
80: HTTP | TCP
110: Post office Protocol (POP) | TCP
137-139: NetBios | UDP/TCP
143: (IMAP) Internet Mail Access Protcol | TCP
161: SNMP Simple Network Management Protocol | UDP
162: SNMP trap operation | UDP
389: Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) | TCP
443: HTTPS | TCP
445: SMB (Server Message Block) | Windows compatible printer sharing
3389: RDP Remote Desktop Protocol | TCP => Graphical control connection to a computer

# Network Configuration concepts

DHCP and DNS are used to simplify the low-level addressing implemented by IP.

## DHCP - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol

Automatically assign IP and subnet mask to avoid problems of manually assigning IP addresses.
A DHCP server can live in a Router, switch, standalone device, Network appliance or Cloud environment.

### DHCP Scope
- Scope is the range of addresses a DHCP server can offer client hosts on a particular subnet.
- It should exclude manually assigned IP addresses
- It must include router address

### DHCP leases
- Package sequence: DISCOVER (client) => Offer (Server) => Request (client) => Pack (server)
1. DHCPDiscover
2. DHCPOffer: Server returns IP address, default gateway, and DNS server address.
3. DHCPRequest: Client accepts the offer
4. DHCPack => Server acknowledges if the address is still available. After client broadcasts ARP message to make sure address is unused. If used, requests another one.

- Addresses are leased by DHCP server for a limited time.
- Client can attempt to renew or bind the ip before time is over

### DHCP Reservations
- Some services (server, router, printer) require to have a consistent IP address
- We can configure a DHCP server to reserve IP addresses to specific devices
- It takes a list of MAC addresses that should receive the same IP address

## Domain Name System

- Host names are a friendly way of remembering IPV4 or IPV6 addresses
- Host name is configured when OS is installed
- Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDM): Host name can be combined with a domain name and suffix to avoid duplication
    Ex. `nut.widget.example`
    `nut`: host
    `widget.example`: domain suffix
        `widget`: domain name
        `example`: Top level domain (TLD)

- DNS: Global hierarchy of distributed name server databases that links domains and hosts
    - root: `.`
    - Top-level domain: `com`, `net`, etc
    - domain: `google`
    - sub-domain: `maps`
    - resource records: `www` or `pc`

## DNS queries
- Client (browser) or "Stub resolver" communicates with DNS server on port 53
- When looking for a domain name in the browser cache gets checked first
- If IP address for domain not cached, sent to a local DNS server (Addresses set in the TCP/IP configuration)
- The sequence is a recursive process that starts with the top level domain all the way to the subdomain and resourece records
- When the process is complete the browser caches the address for the particular FQDM

## DNS Record Types
A host will store records types (Windows Server DNS for example)

A: IPV4 address
AAAA: IPV6 address
MX: Mail Exchanger => To identify email services so that other servers can send messages to it. Host name in the MX record must have an IPV4 or IPV6 address

## DNS Spam Management Records
- `TXT` records are free-form text used to support other network services.
- Commonly used to verify email services and block transmission of Spam

### Sender Policy Framework (SPF)
- Uses TXT record published by DNS. 
- Identifies host authorized to send emails from a domain.

### DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
- Uses cryptography to validate source server for a given email message.
- Supplements or replaces SPF
- Org published public encryption key as a `TXT` record so receivers can verify origin of email

### Domain-Based Message Authentication, Reporting, Conformance (DMARC)
- DMARC: Ensures SPF and DKIM are used effectively
- Policy published as a `TXT` record
- More robust policy mechanism

## Virtual LANs (VLANs)
- All devices on an unmanaged switch are on the same broadcast domain
- VLAN operated on Layer 2 - Link.
- This can reduce performance if hundreds or thousands of ports are placed in the same broadcast domain
- A managed Switch can divide ports into different groups using the VLAN feature
- VLAN id from 2 to 4094, => Several ports can be connected to a VLAN (interface) Id (bridge-access) to keep them separate
- A VLAN can only access another one through the Router
- Each VLAN has its own IP address and DHCP and DNS servers
- Improved security and reduce excessive broadcast traffic
- Good for insulating devices.

Difference between VLAN and Subnet: https://www.pynetlabs.com/vlan-vs-subnet-whats-the-difference/

## Virtual Private Networks (VPN)
- Enables host to connect to the LAN remotely
- Host connects to the LAN via a remote access server that takes connections from the internet
- It uses special connection protocols and encryption to ensure user authenticated and no spoofing
- VPN traffic is routed over the network



