# Supporting network services

## File / Print servers
Core network function => Access to files and printing resources through a client-server architecture
Server => Machine hosting files or printers (Fileshare or print server)

Fileshare can be implemented with proprietary protocol for Windows Networks, or with TCP/IP protocols such as File Transfer Protocol (FTP)

### Server Message Block (SBM)
- Application protocol in Windows networks underpining file a printer sharing
- Runs over port TCP/455
- Current version SBM-3 . SMB-1 disabled by default due to vulnerabilities
- Support for SBM in Unix / Linux via Samba software suite => Allows Windows client to access a Linux host
- SBM sometimes reffered as Common Internet File System (CIFS)

### Network Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS)
- Legacy network protocol for Windows, before TCP/IP
- Allows computers to refer to each other by name
- It was re-engineered to work over TCP and UDP protocols => NetBIOS over TCP (NetBT)
- NetBT uses UDP/137 for name services and TCP/139 for session services

### File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
- Allows clients to upload and download files from a network
- Associated to TCP/21
- TCP/20 to transfer data in active mode
- Unencrypted => Security flaw
- FTPS => Secure FTP
- SFTP => FTP over secure shell

## Web servers

### Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (http)

- Enables requests for an http server
- Port TCP/80 and TCP/433

### Hyper Text markup language (HTML)
- Plain text file that is interpreted by a browser to render a page
- POST request allow cients to send data to the server
- Extended by supporting scripts and programmable features (web apps)

### Uniform Resource Locators (URL)
- Access scheme to reach resources on the internet
- URL = Protocol + FQDN + Filepath

### Web server develoyment

- Typically web servers are leased, but larger organization might host websites themselves.
- Intranets => Private networks using web technologies

## Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure (https)
- http from early internet unencrypted and non-authenticated
- Secure Socket Layer (SSL) was developed by Netscape in the 90s to address this
- Transport Layer Security (TLS) was developed from Netscape's SSL and ratified by IETF
- TLS + HTTP => HTTPS over port TCP/433
- TLS can be used to secure other communication protocols such as FTP, POP3/IMAP, SMTP, LDAP

### SSL certificate
- To implement HTTPS an SSL certificate is installed on the server
- SSL certificate is issues by a Certificate Authority (who you must trust) => Server uses encrypted data to prove the identity of the server to the client
- The server has a private key and publishes the public key for clients to communicate with it => Encrypted tunnel
- Secure site url starts with https and shows a lock on the search bar

## Mail servers
Two types of web servers and protocols are used to process email:

1. Mail Transfer
2. Mail Access

### Email movement
Local Mail Client (Sending email)
    Stores sent emails in local IMAP server (Port 993)
    Sends email to local SMTP server (secure over Port 587)
Local SMTP server
    - Looks up remote server IP address using DNS and MX records of the receipients email address (domain portion of address. Ex: @rafart.tech)
    - Establishes session with remote receipient SMPT server => Unencrypted over port 25
Remote SMTP server
    - Stores email on the receipient local IMAP server
Remote Mail Client
    - Connects to their local IMAP server to retreive the message (port 993)

### Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
- It specifies how an email moves from one server to another.
- SMPT servers for domain are stored in MX and A/AAAA records

Port 25 => Used to transfer emails over servers. Unsecure.  (MTA- Message Transfer Agents)
TCP 587 => Used by email clients to submit messages for delivery to the local SMPT server. (MSA - Message Submission Agents)
    - It should authentication and encryption to protect the service

## Mailbox servers
SMTP servers are only for send/receive. The SMTP server sends emails to a Mailbox Server, a separate application.

### Post Office Protocol 3 (PoP3)
- PoP client applications: Thunderbird, Outlook
- PoP client applications establish connection to PoP server on TCP/110 or secure over TCP/995
- User authenticated with username and password
- Messages are usually deleted from server when downloaded

### Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
- Mail retreival protocol, lacks some features of PoP3
- Permanent connection to server
- Multiple clients to same mailbox
- Multiple mailboxes
- TCP/143 for insecure connection
- IMAPS (IMAP secure) over TCP/993 using TLS

## Directory and Authentication Servers

### Single Sign On (SSO)
Authentication processes that allows users to access all the network and authorization for applications running on a server.

### Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
- It provides a heirarchical directory (DB) of resources, users and their privileges. Like a phonebook.
- It can be queried with limited data.
- Supported by OpenLDAP and Windows Active Directory
- Uses TCP and UDP port 389
- Used in Active Directory

#### Active Directory
- Large database of your network: Devices, printers
- Single console for system admins to control every device in the network
- Many servers, not suitable for home use

### Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA Server)
- Storing copies of a network directory on each device a network client might access would be a waste of storage, processing and bring security issue (APs, 
switches, VPNs)
- An AAA server consolidates authentication services across access devices
Concepts: 
1. Supplicant => Device requesting access (Ex. a PC)
2. AAA Clients / Network Access Server (NAS) or Network Access Point (NAP) => Network access appliances (AAA clients or authenticators) (Ex. Switches, APs, VPNs)
3. AAA Server => Authenticator server in the local network

AAA is often implemented using the `RADIUS` Remote Authenticator Dial-in User Service protocol.

The supplicant requests resources to the AAA client, who blocks traffic. AAA client sits in the middle between Suplicant and AAA server until supplicant is authenticated. When authenticated, AAA client opens port to send resources to Supplicant.

## Remote Terminal Access Server
- Terminal TTY device refers to a teletype device used in the old days to enter commands into computer
- What we know today as command line is a Terminal Emulator
- Remote Terminal Server allows remote connections to the command line.

### Secure Shell (SSH)
- Principal mean to access remote access in Linux and Unix servers, and network appliances (Switches, Routers, Firewalls)
- Encrypted terminal emulation
- Most common SSH server is OpenSSH
- SSH server listens on TCP/22

### Telnet
- Protocol and terminal emulation tool
- TCP/23
- Password protected but not encrypted
- Insecure

### Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP)
- For GUI administration
- Microsoft's protocol to operate remote GUI connections
- Runs on port TCP/3389
- Also Open source server products, as well as clients  apps for MacOs, Linux, Android, iOS

## Network Monitoring Servers
A Network Monitoring server is important to keep services running smoothly.

### Simple Network Management Protocol
- Framework for monitoring network devices
- Management System and Agents
- Agents are processes running on network devices (Switch, router, server).
    - Agents mainain a Management Information database (MIB) with statistics of the activity of device
    - Agents trap operations to inform of notable events.
    - Queries over TCP/161, Traps over TCP/162
- Management System queries MIBs on a regular basis
    Displays trap operations

### Syslog
- Protocol to consolidate logs from distributed systems, for more effective monitoring.
- Syslog collector listens on TCP/514
- Open format for event data
- A Log contains 1. PRI code 2. Header containing timestamp and host name and 3. Message. Format of message application dependent.

////

# Internet and Embedded Appliances

## Proxy Server
- SOHO translates private IPs into public ones with a NAT in the router
- An enterprise could use a Proxy Server
- Proxy server takes whole HTTP/s request from a client and forwards it to a destination server and routes the response back into LAN computer
- Can be software or hardware device.
- Non transparent configuration: Client must specify proxy server address and Port (8080 by convention)
- Proxy server can filter certain content and limit access times
- Not same as VPN => Vpn also encrypts data and supports all traffic

## SPAM Gateways and Unified Threat Management
Security scanners implemented as software or hardware internet appliances, each with its own login and config.

- Firewalls: Block traffic based on Network Access Control List
- Intrusion Detection System (IDS):  Script that analyzes malicious traffic patterns
- Intrusion Prevention System (IPS): Can block source IP for malicious traffic
- Antivirus / Antimalware => Scan known malware signatures in binaries
- SPAM gateways (SPF/ DKIM / DMARC) => Verify authenticity of mail servers and configured with filters
- Content filters: Block access to unauthorized websites
- Data Leak/Loss Prevention (DLP): Scans outgoing traffic for confidential or personal info, blocks traffic.
- Unified Threat Management (UTM): Single appliance for multiple security policies and centralized threat management.

## Load Balancers
- For routing trafic to different servers with the same function.
- Put in front of the server network
- Service address IP shown to clients as a virtual server
- For High availability services

## Legacy Systems
- System no longer supported by vendor
- EOL: End of Life, no longer supported
- Work well
- Security risk because no patches to vulnerabilities
- It's better to insulate them from the rest of the network

## Embedded Systems and SCADA
- Electronic device design for a specific dedicated function
- Typically they operate within a closed network
- Legacy and embedded systems are risky for maintenance and security, as they require scarce specialized knowledge.

### Workflow and process automation systems
- Industrial Control System (ICS): workflow and process automation of machinery
- ICS has components with embedded programmable Logic components (PLCs)
- An Embedded system network is referred to as Operational Technology (OT) network, different from IT network

### Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
- Control server in a large scale with multiple ICSs.
- Typically use WAN networks to communicate SCADA to field devices

## Internet Of Things (IoT) device
- Global network of wearable technology, home appliances with network connectivity.
- Hub/control system: IoT devices have no control interface (headless), they require a central hub to control: App, PC for example.
- Smart Devices: 
    - Devices are vulnerable.
    - Most use Linux or Android kernell => Mini-computers vulnerable to standart attacks of web apps and network functions
    - Peripherals in devices can be compromised (cameras, microphones)
- Some use Z-Wave or Zigbee wireless tech to communicate with the hub

# Troubleshoot networks

## Troubleshooting wired connectivity

If the network connectivity issue is insulated to a single host it could be one of the following problems:

- NIC port on host
- RJ45 patch cable between wall and host
    - Test cables with a sable tester
- Structured cable between wall and patch panel (IDC connector)
    - Use cable tester to make sure it's Structured cable is wired correctly. Lights on tester should light in the correct order.
- RJ45 connector between patch panel and Switch
- Network tranciever in port switch
    - Use loopback test tool, swap ports on NIC or swap ports on the Switch to test the tranceivers (NIC and Switch)

LEDs in Switch and network port show activity and are useful for troubleshooting

## Troubleshoot network speed
- It could be misconfiguration. Mismatched duplex settings on network adapter or Switch port.

Different causes: 
- Specific web activity. Check what activity the user is doing (Web, file transfer, auth)
- Use utility to check nominal speed of connection independent of specific apps
- Cable: External interference => Power lines or florescent lights can interfer with cable signal. Also improper termination, excessive twisting.
- Network adapter driver => Install update and check if other hosts with driver have the same issue.
- Malware or faulty software.
- Scope of the issue: single host, whole network => Congestion on a Switch

## Troubleshoot wireless issues
Wireless issues can be of physical media (interference or distance) or configuration.
- Distance: Radio frequencies become weaker with distance. Try putting devices closer.

### Wireless configuration issues
- A network could be out of range
- An network's name / SSID could be suppressed at a configuration level.
- Standards mismatch: AP compatibilty mode could be disabled and older devices will not be able to connect.
- An older device in the network can affect the connection of it all:  
    - 802.11b clients joining a 802.11n access point will add overhead as it will have to transmit legacy frame preamble and collision avoidance frames
    - Upgrade older devices in the network

### Received signal strength indicator (RSSI)
- Wireless adapter automatically reduces speed if signal strength isn't at a minimul level, to make it more reliable.
- If signal too weak, network adapter will drop it completely

### Troubleshooting wireless signal issues
If signal is weak with device within range, then there could be Interference, meaning there's another device broadcasting at the same frequency
- Try adjusting channel device uses
- Turn off source of radio waves (motor, microwaves)
- Remove materials that could block micro-waves (Metal or dense objects)
- Use WiFi analyzer software

## Troubleshoot VoIP (Voice over IP) issues
VoIP is a real time transfer protocol for Voice.
- Issues: drop out, glitches, echo.

- Networks such as http, FTP and email are sensitive to packet loss but tolerant to delays => "Bursty"
- Real time applications are tolerant to package loss but not to delays

Problems with timing and sequence of packages
- Latency
    Delay. VoIP supports maximum one-way latency of 150ms

- Jitter
    - Variation in delay time. VoIP uses 
    - Typically caused by network congestion

Quality of Service (QoS):
- Mechanism that tells network applicances to priritize VoIP data over bursty data.
- They can be added on managed Switches and Routers on an enterprise network
- On a SoHO router you may be able to configure it in Bandwidth Control section.

## Troubeshoot limited connectivity
Limited connectivity => Host established connection but doesn't get IP lease from DHCP server

1. Establish scope of issue. If it's for multiple hosts, then the issue might be in the DHCP server
    Offline, ran out of IP addresses, or misconfiguration
2. Configuration patch chords
3. VLAN configuration => Switch port with mixed up VLAN ID, same effect as connecting host to wrong Switch port


