# Virtualization and Cloud Concepts

Virtualization => Running multiple OS on a single hardware allows
    - Testing and training
    - Cloud computing

# Client-side virtualization

Virtualziation allows multiple insulated software environments

## Hypervisors

A software that allows to run multiple Operating Systems on the same hardware
- OS installed on hypervisor is called Virtual Machine (VM) or guest OS
- It mediates the access to hardware resources to avoid conflicts with Host OS
- VMs need drivers for the emulated hardware components

Two ways of implementing Hypervisors:

### Type 2 Hypervisors
- Hypervisor is installed on a Host OS
- Examples are VMWare and Virtual Box (Oracle), Workstation (Parallels) 

### Type 1 Hypervisors
- Hypervisor is installed directly on the hardware and doesn't go through a host OS
- A Virtual Machine Manages manages all operating systems as Guest OS
- Examples: ESXi (VMWare), Hyper-V (Microsoft), XEN (Citrix)
- Bare metal virtual platform

## Uses of Virtualization
Mainly used for Testing and development
- Sandbox: OS to test worms, viruses, Trojans. Malware contained in guest OS can't affect rest of computer.
- Support legacy software applications and OSs => Install Old OS as a VM
- Cross platform virtualization => Test Software under different OSs
- Training => LAB environments

### Server-Side Virtualization
- Deploying server as VM
- Usefull to use hardware more fully (several virtual servers on one hardware server for example)

### Application Virtualization
- So that clients can access latest version of application
- Most use Citrix XENApp

### Container Virtualization
- No hypervisor, enforces resource separation at OS level
- Cannot run Guest OS of different types (Running Windows on Linux Host for example)
- Docker => Server -> Host OS -> Docker Engine -> Binaries and libraries (shared or separate) -> Apps and instances

## Virtualization Resource requirements

Hypervisors have technical requirements to work.
- SLAT - Seconday Level Address Translation: Processor feature that improves perfomance of Virtual Memory when multiple VMs installed.
- CPU with virtualization support enabled (VT-x for Intel and AMD-V for AMD) and SLAT
- Multiple CPUs (Multicore, hyperthreading) will benefit performance, specially if more than 1 OS running
- Hypervisor on 64-bit environment can run 32 Bit OS, but not the other way round

### System memory
- Each Guest OS requires system memory over or above what Hypervisor requires. There must be sufficient memory to run Host and Guest OSs

### Mass Storage
- VM hard disk stored as image file in Host OS file system, that dynamically changes size
- They take a substantial amount of space, even more with snapshots
- In business network, images can be stored in high-speed Storage Area Network (SAN)

### Networking
- Virtual network environment created by Hypervisor in which all VMs can communicate
- Enterprise virtual platforms allow configuration of virtual switches and routers

## Virtualization Security Requirements
- A GuestOS has the same security vulnerabilities as a HostOS
- Running antivirus on each GuesOS can cause problems
- Running antivirus on HostOS won't catch malware in the GuestOS'
- Virtual Machine Sprawl => Config issue were deployment of VMs is not properly authorized or monitored. 
    - Ex. When admins install VMs for specific needs but forget to decomission them: Resource waste, license cost, high operational overhead.
    - Difficult in maintenance and troubleshooting
    - It can lead to Rougue VMs => Installed without authorization
- Big concern => Rougue developers installing backdoors or "logic bombs"

### Host Security
- Host is single point of failure for all guest OS instances.

### Hypervisor Security
- Hypervisor should be monitored for security vulnerability
- Virtual Machine Escaping (VM Escaping) => Malware in a guest jumping to other guest or host.
    Securty vulnerability that allows attacker to leave VM and access host OS and other Virtual machines (Exploits vulnerabilities in VM software or configuration)


# Cloud Concepts

- Cloud solution provide compute resources over a network (servers, databases, containers storage, apps)
- Metered Utilization:  Users pay for the exact resources they're using

Cloud provides
1. High Availability
2. Scalability (Horizontal or Vertical)
3. Rapid Elasticity => Ability of system to adapt to change in resource demand in real-time

Cloud providers must be able to provision and deprovision resources automatically. They achieve this with share resources and virtualization. Hardware is not reserved to a single user account.

## Common Cloud Deployment Models
Cloud can be deployed on a combination of owenership and access arrangements.

1. Public (multitenant)
A Cloud Service Provider (CSP) can offer clients (tenants) subscriptions, pay-as-you-go, or free services. Shared resource has risks regarding performance and security.

2. Private
Cloud infrastructure owned by organization. Greater control over security and privacy. Geared towards banking and government services.

3. Community
Several organizations share the cost of a hosted private or fully private cloud. Done to pull resources for a common concern like standarization and policies.

4. Hybrid
Mix of the three above. Different services by a company can be served from different types of cloud.

## Common Cloud Service Models

1. Infrastructure as a Servive (IaaS)
- Provisioning Servers, Storage, LBs, SANs over a network instead of company purchasing and maintainig equipment. 
- Providers: AWS EC2, Azure Virtual Machines, OpenStack. 

2. Software as a Service (SaaS)
 - Access a software hosted on a company's server for a subscription
 - Developers can provision applications much faster
 - Apps can be developed and tested in the cloud
 - Ex. Google Workspace, Microsoft Office 365, Salesforce

3. Platform as a Service (PaaS)
- Provides servers and storage as well as a multi-tier web application or database platform on top.
- Ex. Oracle DB, Microsoft Azure SQL, Google App Engine (EC2?).
- Developers would be in charge of developing the application, while cloud provider will ensure the integrity and availability of the platform's components.
- Provider in charge of OS, patching, licenses, Antivirus, network connectivity.

## Desktop Virtualization (VDI)
VDI is using VMs to provide corporate desktops. Replaces desktop computers with low-spec thin client computers.

- Thin-client device loads minimal OS that allows the user to log on to the VM on the company's server
- Application processing and storage is performed on the Server
- Virtualization server can be deployed on-prem or in the cloud.
- Virtual Desktops easier to maintain and troubleshoot - Desktop as a Service (DaaS)
- Company can offload entire IT infrastructure to a third-party service.
- Disadvantage: Downtime can be costly as no one can work locally.

## Cloud File Storage
- Particular form of SaaS
- Automated file syncronization
- Facilitates file sharing
- Easy to track edits
- In cloud, files are often duplicated accross data centers for better availability (Ex. Content Delivery Networks provide website assets close to the ISP networks)
- Important to duplicate data across data centers.

## Software Defined Networking

- Software-Defined networking (SDN): Model on how to use scripting processes to provision and deprovision resources automatically
- SDN model by IETF divides network functions into 3 layers:

1. Application Layer
- Busines logic that decides how traffic is priritized, secured, and where it should be switched

2. Control Layer
- A virtual device know as SDN controller
- Northbound API (to application layer) and Southbound API (To infrastructure layer)

3. Infrastructure layer
Container devices, physical or virtual, that handle forwarding (switching and routing)

Each layer exposes an API

